THE escalation of Queensland floods is set to trigger one of Australia's biggest insurance payouts with claims expected to run into the billions of dollars.

Shares in the nation's two biggest insurers, Suncorp and Insurance Australia Group, fell yesterday amid concerns rising payouts could slice earnings.

Even before flooding wreaked havoc through Toowoomba, analysts were tipping insurance losses could exceed $1 billion.

The pace at which claims are being lodged is expected to increase this week as the floods hit Brisbane.

Brisbane's 1974 floods resulted in insurance losses equivalent to $2.1 billion, if adjusted for inflation and changes in population density, according to calculations by the brokerage firm UBS.

Authorities in Brisbane have predicted as many as 6500 properties are vulnerable to flooding. The biggest claims are set to come under home and contents policies, followed by those for property, business interruption and motor vehicle.

Australia's most expensive insurance event was the the 1989 Newcastle earthquake which, adjusted for inflation, caused the equivalent of $4.3 billion in payouts. The Sydney hailstorm a decade later resulted in $3.3 billion in losses.

The Insurance Council of Australia estimated that insurers had received 4300 claims from customers but this figure did not factor in the Toowoomba event.

''We haven't seen anything like this before in Queensland. It's going to be a long event because some people aren't in a position to put their claims in immediately,'' a council spokeswoman, Sandra Van Dijk, said.

The company with the largest exposure will be Suncorp, which writes about $1.4 billion worth of coverage in Queensland each year - 19 per cent of the group's annual gross written premium.

Suncorp has received about 2500 claims for flood damage. IAG has received about 900 claims. Both companies said it was too early to assess the financial impact of the disaster.

Suncorp had reinsurance coverage for the floods but it was too early to assess if the cost of the floods would cause its natural perils allowance to run over budget, a spokesman said.

''We don't know what the cost of these floods are going to be. We set aside a large amount of money every year for natural perils and we also have comprehensive reinsurance arrangements in place,'' he said.

with AAP

 


