AFP

Haitians have been stunned by the sudden return of former dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier, likening his reappearance after 25 years in exile to greeting the man who fell to earth.

As friends and well-wishers trooped through the luxury Karibe Hotel on  Monday to welcome the man who once ruled the Caribbean nation with a bloody fist, speculation swirled about why he had chosen this traumatic moment in Haiti's chaotic history to return.

Despite an atmosphere of tense speculation, there have been no arrests, no riots, no celebrations, no endorsements, no announcements, no explanations. No news, almost, except the return of a man ousted from power in 1986.

"We're just surprised at the timing of the arrival of Jean Claude Duvalier. Coming as it does, when it does, given everything occurring right now around the elections," the US embassy in Haiti told AFP in a statement.

But the human rights community, and those once victim to Baby Doc's tactics of torture and repression, cannot hide their revulsion and horror.

"Haiti has enough troubles without Duvalier," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas Director of Human Rights Watch, in a statement.

"Politics, it's like mathematics," said one young bystander late on Sunday.

"Right now, they don't even believe it's him. He just fell from the sky."

The campaign of Michel "Sweet Micky" Martelly, one of the most popular candidates in November's presidential elections, was caught off-guard by Duvalier's arrival, according to campaign sources.

From a political standpoint, Martelly would seem to have the most to lose in the stalled elections to replace President Rene Preval. In the run-up to the November vote, some accused Martelly of being a neo-Duvalierist.

"Many of the people around Martelly are neo-Duvalierist," said Robert Fatton, a Haitian-born history professor at the University of Virginia.

"So this is the other possibility, that Preval allowed Jean-Claude to get back in the country to show the population that in fact Jean-Claude and Martelly are the same. So that would discredit Martelly and he could push for his candidate."

Veronique Roy, Duvalier's long-time partner travelling with him, however dismissed speculation he had been asked to return by Preval, telling AFP: "There has been absolutely no contact."

But some Haitians are now beginning to wonder whether Martelly will team up with the 59-year-old Duvalier in a new political scene, dominated by old characters.

Albert Chancy, the director of Radio Tele Superstar, a local news outlet, says Duvalier's arrival has shown how many people are linked to the old regime.

"Everybody knows everybody. Manigat, Martelly, Celestin."

The uncle of Jude Celestin - Preval's handpicked protege - is Rony Gilot, who was information minister under Jean-Claude Duvalier. He also penned a biography of Duvalier's father Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier, whom "Baby Doc" took over from at the age of 19.

The return of Duvalier is being heralded, mostly, by young voters, far too young to remember Haiti's violent past.

The dreaded Tonton Macoutes, a secret police force loyal to the Duvalier family, have been accused of kidnapping, torturing and killing up to 30,000 suspected opponents during the 1960s and 1970s.

Late on Sunday, Emmanuel, 23, strolled through the streets of Petionville, listening to the latest Haitian hip-hop tracks. He said he had heard of Duvalier: "He was president, right?"

But beyond that, his knowledge consisted of little more than myth and innuendo.

"Duvalier is some kind of name that they know, that they read about in books or hear on the radio or that their parents talk about," said Fatton.

"But for the vast majority of young Haitians, Duvalier is an unknown."

Many believe Preval orchestrated Duvalier's arrival to sink the Sweet Micky ship.

To generate substantive change for the impoverished nation still struggling to recover from a devastating earthquake a year ago, whoever becomes Haiti's next president will need a powerful coalition in parliament.

Celestin's party INITE took a majority in November's elections.

But a report by the Organisation of American States put Martelly ahead of Celestin and said the latter should not stand in a second round run-off against former first lady Mirlande Manigat who won 31 per cent in the first vote.

Whether or not Duvalier, who has merely said so far that he has "come to help," will run for president is still unknown.

A French diplomat said he had a return ticket to France on Thursday, January 20. But Prime Minister Jean-Claude Bellerive confirmed Duvalier travelled to Haiti on an expired passport, something which some say could make it impossible for him to return to France.

Duvalier was due to make an announcement Tuesday, but his arrival has caused enough upset and confusion here to draw attention away from other, pressing issues and perhaps further stall a second round of votes.


