DANMA NIU travelled alone from the Himalayas where her family herds yaks  to a computer desk at a Sydney university.   But the 23-year-old, who grew up among snow-covered mountains and forests,  says that journey was nowhere near as daunting as dipping her toes in the Pacific Ocean for the first time.

In her home village, in her quest for an education, the Tibetan   faced poverty, sexism and cultural challenges with  courage. Walking across  Bronte beach last week, however, left her "squeaking" with wonderment.   "I thought I was sinking when I walked on the sand," she said, laughing.

Nothing deters Ms Niu from her goals and that includes studying for qualifications to help her set up a non-government organisation to continue the  work she has carried out in China.

At 19, she had already become a leader in her  community, bringing a running water and solar power project to her village,  Dechen.

She faced opposition from villagers  who laughed at her "stupid" ideas and even her  mother was ashamed of her.

But Ms Niu was determined to ease the burden of women who "do all the physical jobs" in her village,   herding livestock, collecting wood and fuel,  fetching water and  carrying home supplies of up to 30 kilograms.

Her project has  put a tap in the yard of every villager, giving them instant access to running water.

She has extended those projects to other villages, organised  educators to teach villagers about hygiene  and taught vocational skills to orphans of the Qinghai earthquake. She would like to expand her work to include educating women.

Ms Niu knew she needed to be able to write international-standard submissions and proposals so she applied to study in Sydney  and won a scholarship to the University of Technology, Sydney Insearch program for a one-year diploma of communication.

But she will need financial help  to complete a bachelor's degree.

In her application to UTS Insearch, she wrote of the battles she had fought   to get her ideas heard: " 'Villagers laugh at your stupid ideas. I cannot bear their whispers all around me. I am so ashamed of your decisions,' these are the words my mother spoke to me when I tried to bring running water to my village," Ms Niu wrote. "When I successfully completed this running water project, it changed not only my villagers' living conditions but also the way they think about their mothers, daughters, sisters and wives.

"No longer were we possessions whose only worth was the water and fuel we carried. My work provided one instance where we must be seen as women deserving of education and a say in village decisions."

www.facebook.com/TeamDanma or www.teamdanma.com


