AAP

New Zealanders are showing their support for flood-affected Queensland, with donations flowing in and further Kiwi assistance arriving in Brisbane on Thursday.

A Queensland flood fund set up by the Red Cross on Wednesday afternoon had received about $NZ2000 ($A1,536) in donations by Thursday.

"As much as we compete against each other I think when the chips are down and things happen there's a feeling that we want to give support," said Andrew McKie, the international operations manager for the NZ Red Cross.

"There's a long history of trans-Tasman giving."

Three-quarters of Queensland has been hit by floods over three weeks, claiming 14 lives and wreaking havoc on property, infrastructure and the economy.

On Wednesday, the surging waters poured into the state's capital, Brisbane.

Mr McKie said a Red Cross staffer who will be involved in co-ordinating volunteers left Wellington for Brisbane on Thursday.

Another three staff members were due to fly across the Tasman on Friday and a further four planned to make the journey early next week, with the staff rotating every 10 days.

Meanwhile, a 15-member NZ Civil Defence Response Team already helping out in Queensland took a break on Thursday to do maintenance on equipment, team leader Shane Biggs said in a statement.

"The team, operating in hot, humid conditions, has been undertaking physically demanding work relocating the contents of entire households to avoid water damage following severe flooding in the area of Condamine," he said.

The Civil Defence crew will remain in Queensland until January 22, when replacements will be sent in.

"The presence of the New Zealand team members in the town has had an extremely positive impact on residents," Mr Biggs said.

On Wednesday, NZ Prime Minister John Key said up to 60 Fire Service personnel would head to Queensland within a few days, including the urban search and rescue teams that were dispatched to Canterbury following the massive September 4 earthquake on NZ's South Island.

Mr Key said NZ Defence Force personnel would also be made available.


