NEW DELHI: Like Bollywood, the subcontinent always seems to throw up  some dramatic twists.

Consider some of this year's: just when it seemed things could not get much  worse for unstable, nuclear-armed Pakistan it was hit by one of the worst  natural disasters in modern times; America's commander in Afghanistan was forced  to quit after disdainful remarks he made about top White House figures were  reported in Rolling Stone magazine; a revered Sri Lankan military leader  challenged his president at the ballot box but ended up in jail; and India tried  to display its rising global status with the Commonwealth Games only to see the  event sullied by corruption, collapses and filthy bathrooms.

Despite deep international anxiety over the future of Pakistan, the world was  reluctant to help when calamity stuck. Flooding caused by heavy monsoon rains in  July and August killed 1600 people and inundated a fifth of the country. It was  a wrenching blow to a nation racked by militant extremism and economic  malaise.

Even though 20 million people were affected, the international response was  tardy, especially when compared to the earthquake in Haiti or the Boxing Day  tsunami in 2004. Despite the upheaval, Pakistan's fragile government, led by an  unpopular president, Asif Ali Zardari, survived.

Across the border in Afghanistan, another year of fighting failed to subdue  the Taliban. The US-led campaign suffered a blow in June when General Stanley  McCrystal was relieved of his command after sharply critical remarks he made  about members of the Obama administration became public. According to the  monitoring organisation iCasualties.org, 707 international troops were killed in  Afghanistan in 2010, the highest annual total yet in the battle against the  Taliban. Among the dead were 10 Australian soldiers. Another 62 Diggers were  wounded during the year, compared with 37 last year.

A recent war-winner in the region, the Sri Lankan President, Mahinda  Rajapaksa, had a very good year. Seven months after defeating Tamil Tiger rebels  on the battlefield, Mr Rajapaksa thrashed his former military chief, General  Sarath Fonseka, in January's presidential poll then led his party to a thumping  victory in parliamentary elections a few months later. General Fonseka was  subsequently arrested, court martialled and sent to prison. Political reforms  that many hoped would follow the end of the nation's bloody civil war failed to  materialise.

India's growing global clout was underscored when leaders from each permanent  member of the UN Security Council - the US, China, Britain, France and Russia -  visited the capital, New Delhi, between July and December. The US President,  Barack Obama, declared India ''not simply an emerging power but now … a world  power'' and backed New Delhi's bid for a permanent seat at the UN's top  table.

Relations between India and Australia soured early in the year when a young  Indian, Nitin Garg, was stabbed to death in a Melbourne park.

Following the attack the Shiv Sena, a powerful Hindu nationalist group with a  history of political violence in Mumbai, said it would ''not allow'' Australian  cricketers to play in the city until the violence against students stopped.

Soon after, a Pakistan-based extremist, Ilyas Kashmiri, reportedly warned  foreigners not to send competitors to major sports events in India, raising  fears that Australians could be targeted at the Commonwealth Games in Delhi.

Instead it was late-running preparations and health concerns that posed a  bigger threat to the sporting showpiece, held in October. Days before the Games  began a footbridge at the main stadium collapsed, thousands in the city had been  struck down by dengue fever and leaked photographs showed flats at the athletes'  village in filthy disrepair.

Despite the embarrassing glitches, the Games passed without incident and,  after a slow start, were enthusiastically supported by locals. Several senior  Games officials were arrested on corruption charges but their alleged financial  misdemeanours appear to be minor compared with a telecommunications scam worth  tens of billions of dollars that last month paralysed parliament and rocked  India's governing coalition.

Meanwhile, months of violent protest in Indian-controlled Kashmir and a  series of deadly attacks by Maoist insurgents in central India were a reminder  that many Indians feel alienated and disaffected despite the country's rapid  economic expansion.


