PORT-AU-PRINCE: Haiti could use some good news, and on the eve of the anniversary of the nation's ruinous earthquake business and government leaders signed a deal for a big factory, a historic market reopened, and an aid worker returned to tell how he survived 65 hours buried in the rubble.

In a cavernous hall filled with idle sewing machines, the chairman of the South Korean apparel giant Sae-A Trading Company signed a deal to bring 20,000 jobs to Haiti.

''I have to say this is the best day of my life,'' the Haitian Prime Minister, Jean-Max Bellerive, said.

''Haiti is open for business,'' said Jose Agustin Aguerre, the director of Haiti projects for the Inter-American Development Bank.

The former US president Bill Clinton was on hand, saying many communities in the United States would jump through fire for 20,000 jobs. Mr Clinton is co-chairman of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission, which will dole out the $US4.5 billion in assistance pledged for Haiti this year.

Twenty years ago there were 100,000 garment workers in Haiti, but today there are only 28,000, who produce $US500 million in goods, mostly T-shirts, almost 90 per cent of the country's exports.

As part of the deal, the Koreans will bring $US78 million in equipment, and train and employ the workers. The US government, with the Inter-American Development Bank, will spend $US170 million erecting a power plant, an industrial park, factory shells and 5000 worker houses, and improving the northern port of Cap-Haitien.

The factory's doors are scheduled to open next year.

The Caribbean mobile phone carrier Digicel and its billionaire Irish chief executive, Denis O'Brien, spent $US12 million renovating the historic Iron Market, which collapsed in the quake. It reopened on Tuesday.

The building, which had become chaotic, filthy and dangerous before the quake, has been reborn, its elaborate red and green turrets and gables rising above a devastated downtown. Inside, ceiling fans spun and potted plants hung from the ceilings. It was, for a moment, the cleanest, newest, prettiest thing in Haiti.

Nadia Charles, a street vendor who sells rice, sugar and beans, hopes to get her old place back inside the Iron Market.

''I never thought that Iron Market would be rebuilt as it was before. The market is beautiful. I hope people can keep it clean and do not destroy it like they used to do,'' she said.

Haitians were to pause to remember the 220,000 victims of last year's magnitude 7.0 earthquake on the first anniversary of the disaster yesterday.

More than 800,000 people still live in squalid tent camps.

Agence France-Presse

 


