"I've never had a movie open on my birthday before. We'll see what the  movie gods wanna do about it." Nicolas Cage on the release of his new  film Season Of The Witch.  "I'm much more of a  homebody than a person who goes out. I don't think I've ever been to a  club other than to see a band. I don't really find it that fun." -  Gossip Girl star Blake Lively prefers staying in.  "I was an  overweight child with a bad self-image. Playing deformed people attracts  me. It's endearing."-  Hellboy star Ron Perlman enjoys playing unusual  roles.  "I grew up in West Hollywood, in the heart of the gay  community, so I've always been attuned with the gays. I've often been  told I'm a gay man in a woman's body. I'm a massive 'fairy princess', as  I like to call it."-  Actress Mila Kunis feels close to the homosexual  community.  "In 22 years of acting, I've only done two movies  where I, personally, kill people. The Coens called me the Spanish  Ballerina on (the No Country For Old Men) set, because every time I had  the gun, when they called cut, I'd give it back and say, 'Take this s**t  out of my hands!' There were laughing, like they couldn't believe I was  supposed to be the villain." - Javier Bardem hates playing violent bad  guys.  "I'm very surprised. I have a lot of different feelings  on it. I don't just feel one way. I kind of didn't want to put a generic  statement out there like 'Congratulations!' because I felt everyone  would see through that." - Hugh Hefner's ex-girlfriend Holly Madison is  not pleased to hear of the Playboy mogul's Christmas engagement to new  blonde lover Crystal Harris.  "The funny thing was trying to  control the 50 men who have to follow Angelica's orders! I am so tiny  and had to be in control and giving them orders." - Penelope Cruz barked  orders to play swashbuckling Angelica Blackbeard in Pirates Of The  Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.  "You just get really drunk all  the time. Which is awesome! At least I did anyway, it's not very  professional. There's a Bloody Mary at 10am and you keep it going all  day!" - Oscar winner Gwyneth Paltrow reveals how she convincingly played  a recovering alcoholic singer in new movie Country Strong.  "I  am still recovering from the news. I never really cared about the Rock  & Roll Hall of Fame... but now I am surprised to discover how much I  do care." - Tom Waits on his upcoming Rock & Roll Hall of Fame  induction.  "She'll really tell me... Like today I'm wearing  brown suede pants, and she said, 'I don't like your pants'. But then  she'll say, 'You've got to wear these shoes', or, 'That's so pretty,  mum. Wear that.' She's got a great eye." - Katie Holmes insists her  daughter Suri is a fashion expert.  "He's a real p**ck, and I  sure know how to play that." - Dallas star Larry Hagman on his scheming  new Desperate Housewives character Frank Kaminski.  "When you  get close to her you realise she's an old woman and has no idea what's  going on" - Singer Charlotte Church on the Queen.  "There are  some people who weren't meant to be married and it's very difficult for a  female star. It just is. It's just so wonderful not to be tied down" -  Liza Minnelli, four-times married, is not seeking a fifth husband.  "There's  no end point. This is where I'll be when I'm not working, for the rest  of my life." - Sean Penn is devoted to becoming a lifelong aid worker in  earthquake-ravaged Haiti.  "Keira is the friend I call when I'm  in trouble or suffering from a broken heart. She'll meet me in the bar  with a Mojito and be there for me." - Carey Mulligan relies on friend  Keira Knightley to nurse her through heartache.  "The other  morning I looked across at David just after he'd woken up and thought  you look really c**p. Thank God, because this is a man who always looked  so perfect." - Victoria Beckham is glad that even her soccer hunk  husband David has his down days.  "I am old, I am  post-menopausal, I am grey - and I'm loving it! I'm tired of people  talking it down.. It's OK  to be old. It's kind of hot... I just feel  better, I feel more content and I have some peace." Comedienne Roseanne  Barr feels more confident at 58 than ever before.  "I did see  the Wizard of Oz in a big theatre. It frightened me. It was like my  mother was a little girl and these monkeys flew away with her. I didn't  like it, it was spooky." - Liza Minnelli hated watching her mum Judy  Garland onscreen in the 1939 classic.  "Every man I've been  involved with is terrified of spiders. They all scream like little girls  if I dangle one near them" - Model and actress Elizabeth Hurley.  "Not  trying to be arrogant, but if I walked down the street and a girl saw  me, she might take a look back because maybe I'm good-looking, right?" - Justin Bieber is convinced girls like him for his looks, not just his  fame.  "I know what I'm in for by now - you never read anything  positive. It's 'You're fat, you're ugly, you don't have a career any  more, you're a bad actor'" - Actress Reese Witherspoon, who now does not  read about herself on the internet.  "May 2011 make all your  wishes come true, which for me means a bigger bra size and a shelf for  my Nobel prize for literature. Happy new year" - Greetings from writer Kathy Lette.  "Genius? Ha! He might be a genius on the film set  but the genius part doesn't stretch to picking up his own socks or  cleaning the dinner table or throwing away the rubbish." Helena Bonham  Carter insists her partner Tim Burton's talents don't stretch to  domestic chores.  "I don't find myself as sexy as everyone  thinks. I'm a lot more insecure than people would assume... You have to  learn to like what you see in the mirror. There are definitely times  when I don't feel like myself, but you have to fake it until you make  it." - Socialite Kim Kardashian has had to work on her self-esteem.  "My  wife finds the whole sex symbol thing rather amusing. She knows me as  the man who doesn't pick up his socks" - Actor Colin Firth denying he is  a sex symbol.


