AP

Nearly a million New Year's Eve revellers crowded New York's Times Square to witness the traditional dazzling ball drop, 16 hours after fireworks lit up Sydney Harbour.

In between, Vietnam held a rare Western-style countdown to the New Year as the world ushered in 2011.

In Europe, Greeks, Irish and Spaniards partied through the night to help put a year of economic woe behind them, and Japanese revellers released balloons carrying notes with people's hopes and dreams.

In New York, a crystal ball with 32,000 lights descended at midnight, setting off a wild and noisy confetti-filled New Year's Eve celebration, the US's largest.

It all happened just days after a debilitating blizzard paralysed the city and the surrounding area.

All around the US, people said they were setting aside concerns about the economy, bad winter weather and even potential terrorist threats to ring in 2011 at large and small gatherings.

Even more than most years, New York was in the spotlight as it battled back from a severe snowstorm and security concerns eight months after a Pakistani immigrant tried to detonate a car bomb in Times Square.

Police said the city wasn't the target of a New Year's Eve terror threat but they had a strict security plan in place, with sealed manhole covers, counter-snipers on rooftops and checkpoints for partygoers.

Mayor Michael Bloomberg has endured days of withering criticism for the city's slow response to the Boxing Day storm, which dumped about 50 centimetres of snow.

The president of the Times Square Alliance, Tim Tompkins, said holiday tourists helped to clear streets.

"We have the best snowplow ever invented - 500,000 pairs of feet walking through Times Square," Tompkins said. "That's been melting our snow."

As rain clouds cleared over Madrid's central Puerta del Sol square, about 50,000 people, many sporting large, brightly coloured wigs, gathered to take part in Las Uvas, or The Grapes, a tradition in which people eat a grape for each of the 12 chimes of midnight. Chewing and swallowing the grapes to each tolling of a bell is supposed to bring good luck, while cheating is frowned upon and revellers believe it brings misfortune.

Police had painstakingly screened all those arriving to make sure drinks and bottles were left behind to avoid injury in the crowded square, so many quickly downed their sparkling cava wine before joining the animated party.

As the 12th grape was swallowed, the skies above most Spanish cities lit up with fireworks that slowly filled the air with smoke and the smell of gunpowder.

The year 2010 was a grim one for the European Union, with Greece and Ireland needing bailouts and countries such as Spain and Portugal finding themselves in financial trouble as well.

In Greece, thousands of people spent the last day of 2010 standing in line at tax offices to pay their road tax or sign up for tax amnesty.

Australians, New Zealanders and South Pacific island nations were among the first to celebrate at midnight.

In Auckland, explosions of red, gold and white burst over the Sky Tower, while tens of thousands of people danced and sang in the streets below. In Christchurch, revellers shrugged off a minor earthquake that struck just before 10pm.

Hundreds of thousands of people gathered along Hong Kong's Victoria Harbour to watch fireworks explode from the roofs of 10 of the city's most famous buildings.

In Hanoi, an estimated 55,000 people packed a square in front of the city's elegant French colonial-style opera house for their first New Year's Eve countdown blowout, complete with dizzying strobe lights and thumping techno music spun by international DJs.

Vietnamese typically save their biggest celebrations for Tet, the lunar new year that begins on February 3. But in recent years, Western influence has started seeping into Vietnamese culture among teenagers, who have no memory of war or poverty and are eager to find a new reason to party.

At Japan's Zojoji temple in Tokyo, monks chanted and revellers marked the arrival of the New Year by releasing silver balloons with notes inside. The temple's giant 15-tonne bell rang in the background.

In South Korea, more than 80,000 people celebrated by watching a traditional bell-ringing ceremony and fireworks in Seoul, while North Korea welcomed the New Year with a push for better ties with its neighbour, warning that war "will bring nothing but a nuclear holocaust."

In Dubai, the world's tallest building was awash in fireworks from the base to its needle-like spire nearly 828 metres above. Sparkling silver rays shot out from the Burj Khalifa in a 10-minute display.

In Rio de Janeiro, more than two million people gathered on Copacabana Beach's white sand for 20 minutes of fireworks, music and the unveiling of the logo for the 2016 Olympics. Traffic was shut down along the neighbourhood's main thoroughfares for much of the day in preparation for a party rivalled only by Carnival. Revellers drank and danced to samba played on stages along the 4km beach, and at midnight many waded into the water, jumping over seven waves for good luck.

In France, police were on alert for terror attacks and for celebrations getting out of hand. Rampaging youths typically set fire to scores of vehicles on New Year's Eve. Interior Minister Brice Hortefeux said 53,820 police officers were mobilised, 6000 more than usual.

France has been extra vigilant following threats from al-Qaida and the kidnapping of five French citizens in Niger.

Italians rang in the New Year with illegal fireworks, shot off in squares and alleys - a tradition that usually results in numerous hand and eye injuries.

Naples police chief Santi Giuffre appealed to citizens to "give up or at least cut back on this" practice.

In central London, an estimated quarter-million revellers saw in 2011 as red, white and blue fireworks shot from around the London Eye, lighting up the sky over the River Thames.

In Scotland, the four-day Hogmanay festival began on Thursday night with a torch-lit procession through the streets of Edinburgh. About 25,000 people took part, marching to the top of a hill to watch the burning of a model Viking ship. Hogmanay is derived from the winter solstice festival celebrated by the Vikings.

The Dutch celebrate by eating deep-fried dough balls covered in powdered sugar and washed down with champagne. The Danes jump off chairs to "leap into the New Year." And the Austrians twirl in the New Year with a waltz, carrying radios so they can dance to Strauss's Blue Danube as the clock strikes midnight.


