Why work when the firm will pay you anyway? David Fahrenthold and Kimberly Kindy look at the impact on the Gulf's shrimp industry.

The oil has mostly disappeared. And in southern Louisiana things are finally looking normal six months after the largest oil spill in US history.

But on a truly normal evening Acy Cooper would be out shrimping. Instead, he often stays home in

Venice, an isolated town near the mouth of the Mississippi River.

''Why? It don't pay me to [go shrimping] when they're going to pay my claim anyway,'' says Cooper, a wiry man who is vice-president of the state's shrimpers association.

Today it is BP's money, not its oil, that is most visibly altering the Gulf Coast. The company has been trying - on federal orders - to protect not just the water but the way of life there. But BP's waterfall of cash has changed people's lives profoundly.

The oil company has paid $965 million and set aside $20 billion in a separate compensation fund. The money has been welcomed as a lifeline. But it has made the coast feel like an open-air economic experiment: some hardworking fishermen think it is in their best interest to be idle, losing market share they will need next year. And those who have not been paid are looking for legal and illegal ways to work the system.

Kenneth Feinberg, whom the US President, Barack Obama, chose as compensation tsar, says fishermen such as Cooper are wrong to believe he will pay them not to shrimp. They will be compensated for the time they could not fish, Feinberg says, but ''if a shrimper has the ability to earn a livelihood, there is no longer a need for an emergency payment''.

Across the coast, Feinberg says, people are seeing the limits of what money can do to right an environmental wrong.

''I told 9/11 victims when they said, 'Bring back my wife, or my son or my daughter' - 'I can't do that,' '' says Feinberg, who also oversaw compensation payouts to victims of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. ''I can't compensate you in the Gulf for a way of life that goes back 100 years. I can only compensate you for financial damages.''

And keeping up with that process is proving more difficult by the day. A few weeks ago Feinberg's fund adopted new policies that paid claims faster and more generously. The result: the rate of new claims doubled, Feinberg says.

''People see that their next-door neighbour is getting paid,'' he says. ''So they say, 'Why don't we submit a claim?'''

It has been six months since the explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 men. Two days later the rig's sinking set off a gray-brown geyser of crude oil, which eventually spewed 4.9 million barrels, about 19 times more than the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989.

Scientists are still trying to measure the spill's full impact on the Gulf. On land, though, BP's payments have been as historic as the spill.

So far, BP has paid $569 million to locals who participated in the Vessels of Opportunity program, helping to spot, sop up and burn the oil. It also gave about $396 million to compensate fishermen, hotel owners and others who lost money during the spill, before handing the process over to Feinberg in August.

Ted Melancon, a shrimper from Cut Off, Louisiana, worked for BP for 130 days. ''They sure helped us out, you know. They stepped up to the plate and helped us out … It would have been a bad year,'' he says. He has not counted his full take, but he made enough to buy new nets and new cable for his shrimp boat, as well as a new Ford pick-up.

''Which I didn't really need, but I had to buy. Because, you know, tax write-offs,'' he says. On top of that, he is expecting another BP payout, compensation for the shrimping he could not do this summer.

''I'm done for the season,'' he says. ''It don't pay to go back to work.''

But simply paying shrimpers does not re-create the economy.

The industry is worried that restaurants are replacing the missing Gulf shrimp with imports from Asia. So, when shrimpers such as Melancon return next year, they may find prices and demand are low.

The Washington Post

 


