AAP

US President Barack Obama has used a major speech in his boyhood home of Indonesia to renew his efforts to repair America's frayed relations with the Muslim world.

Mr Obama won rapturous applause and a standing ovation from more than 6000 people, most of them students, for Wednesday's speech at the University of Indonesia in Jakarta.

Mr Obama heaped praise on Indonesia for its democratic transformation and its commitment to religious tolerance and diversity.

"Along with this rich diversity it is also home to the world's largest Muslim population, a truth I came to know as a boy when I heard the call to prayer across Jakarta," he said.

Mr Obama - who lived in Jakarta from age six to 10 - said he had made it a priority of his presidency to repair America's relations with the Muslim world, which had "frayed" over many years.

Mr Obama revisited the themes of his famous 2009 speech in Cairo, in which he called for a new beginning between the Western and Islamic worlds.

"I said then and I repeat now that no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust," he said.

"But I believed then and I believe today that we do have a choice.

"We can choose to be defined by our differences and give in to a future of suspicion and mistrust.

"Or we can choose to do the hard work of forging common ground and commit ourselves to the steady pursuit of progress."

Mr Obama conceded not enough had changed since his Cairo address.

"In the seventeen months that have passed since that speech we have made some progress but we have much more work to do," he said.

Before the speech, Mr Obama visited Jakarta's Istiqlal Mosque, South-East Asia biggest.

Mr Obama said the mosque - which was still under construction when he lived in Jakarta - represented what made Indonesia great.

"Istiqlal means independence and its construction was in part a testament to the nation's struggle for freedom," he said.

"Moreover, this house of worship for many thousands of Muslims was designed by a Christian architect.

"Such is Indonesia's spirit, such is the message of Indonesia's inclusive philosophy."

Mr Obama reminisced about his years in Jakarta - flying kites, running through rice fields and catching dragonflies - and the hospitality of its people.

"I don't think any of us could have anticipated that I would one day come back to Jakarta as president of the United States," he said.

"And few could have anticipated the remarkable story of Indonesia over these last four decades."

Mr Obama said during his time in Indonesia, in the early years of the Suharto dictatorship, people had been afraid to speak their minds.

"In the years since then Indonesia has charted its own course through an extraordinary democratic transformation, from the rule of an iron fist to the rule of the people."

Mr Obama praised the vibrancy of Indonesia's democracy today.

"Some will say it is easier to take a shortcut to development by trading away the rights of human beings for the power of the state," he said.

"But that is not what I saw on my trip to India and that is not what I see here in Indonesia.

"Your achievements demonstrate that democracy and development reinforce one another...

"Prosperity without freedom is just another form of poverty."

Mr Obama's childhood connection to Indonesia has made him extremely popular in the Muslim-majority nation, where many people were hostile to predecessor George W Bush.

So local fans were disappointed when he was forced to cancel two earlier trips: once to oversee the passage of his healthcare reforms and once to deal with the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.

In the end, Obama's stay was brief: less than 20 hours.

It was cut short by several hours to avoid ash spewed from Central Java's Mount Merapi volcano, which has been erupting for the past several weeks, killing scores of people and disrupting air travel.

But early local reviews of the visit - and the speech in particular - were glowing.

Indonesia was the second leg of Mr Obama's Asian tour that began in India and will now take him to South Korea and Japan.


