As the new year starts, Matt Buchanan  takes a last look at the one we left behind.

WHAT we hate says more about us than what we love. No? Think of the opening line of Tolstoy's Anna Karenina: ''Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.'' We nod because what makes people unhappy is more particular - person to person, family to family and nation to nation - than what makes us happy. With that in mind, let's have a look at what made our teeth clench, our hackles rise and our blood boil in 2010.

THE NANNY STATE

The insulting tendency of officialdom towards overwhelming supervision and the imposition of needless and asphyxiating restrictions upon grown adults was nowhere better exemplified than at the Sydney Cricket ground last January. The number and type of Fun Police at the new year Test Match was expanded to include two species of NSW Police (regular and riot), crowd-control officers, crowd safety and customer service personnel. Clive Allright, a spectator, tersely summarised the typical view: ''It's ridiculous.'' Evidence that this was just a prelude for the Super Nanny State came last month when forty-something audience members at the Blondie and Pretenders winery gig at Bimbadgen Estate in the Hunter Valley were made to surrender their cutlery upon entry. That they were not sent to ''Time Out'' for licking their fingers was an unusual if welcome oversight.

 

POLITICIANS

 

It was of course a good year for hating in politics - it always is - but there was just so much to detest, and detest righteously. At the state level the Kristina Keneally government lost ministers at the giddy rate of more than one per month. All year voters had the depressing experience of watching a lot of failed, richly superannuated ministers scurry away as election Waterloo in March drew nearer. They also watched several others leave in disgrace: among them Ian MacDonald was done for travel rorts, Paul McLeay went for viewing pornography, Karyn Paluzzano for fibbing about financial irregularities. David Campbell resigned after he was ''outed'' visiting a gay bathhouse and copped flak, but almost everyone agreed that Adam Walters and Channel 7 were wrong to expose him as they did. The sympathy for Campbell was incredible. Even if he had a couple of major bungles as transport minister, few thought he should resign and the echo of a big backfire hung around Walters and Channel 7 all year.

BANKS

Speaking of mistrust, we kept plenty on hand to add to our hatred of the banks (the collective disregard for which looks more and more like proof of our collective national sanity). In Sydney, we also mistrusted Barangaroo - it's kitsch, isn't it? - but we didn't hate it, not quite.

BP

Overseas, we hated lots of stuff, too: We hated BP for the oil spill. Boy, did we hate BP. We hated BP almost as much as we hated the BP boss, Tony Hayward, for saying ''I'd like my life back''. And we continued to hate the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.

WEATHER

We hated global warming. But what we really hated was talking about global warming.

TV

The Bert and Patti Newton interview with Tracy Grimshaw on A Current Affair - subject: their troubled son, Matt - had Australians everywhere reaching for the sickbag.

PEOPLE: HERE

Kyle Sandilands continued to make a good living being a panto villain: how long before he's seen darkly caped and toppered, walking with his thighs aloft, hands raised clawlike, cackling?

PEOPLE: THERE

Some had the energy to hate Sarah Palin all over again, while others threw their mental tomatoes at Glenn Beck (now that Dubya's gone and all). But few things upset us as much as Mary Bale, who was caught on a security camera throwing a cat into a bin. The cat survived, Ms Bale was lucky to.

SPORT: PEOPLE

Following theAustralian formula one driver Mark Webber has never been easy. He's always losing. His car always breaks. It slides out on the first corner, or just splits in two on the grid. Sometimes he even runs out of fuel. But this year all we heard was that Australia's best-known millionaire recreational petrol waster was going to win it. Of course, he lost it. His car broke.

SPORT: EVENTS

Qatar, not Australia, will host the soccer World Cup in 2022. People here wrongly blamed Frank Lowy and a cliched presentation for our missing out. Qatar's money - they can afford nine air-conditioned demountable stadiums - is what will bring 500,000 fans to the 2 million-strong desert nation.

THE ARTS

Speaking of the theatrical: the local production of Ben Hur showed that the only thing bigger than Ben Hur was the failure of Ben Hur: ''Wow, what a disaster,'' one Herald reader wrote, with tender understatement. The Herald critic Jason Blake wrote ominously in his review: ''If you don't know the story, the final scene - a vanishing trick set in the Valley of the Lepers - could leave one with the impression that Jesus was eaten by zombies.'' Which rather puts us in mind of the ghastly performance by Peaches, Tim Robbins and Marianne Faithful as Rogues Gallery at the Sydney Festival last January: audience survivors still speak, falteringly, of the bit involving Peaches, sadomasochism and some very small pirates.

So: we hated officials telling us what to do; we hated politicians not knowing what they were doing; we hated banks for doing what they've always done; and we hated war and oil spills - as you do. Elsewhere, we hated bad art, bad TV, bad sport and bad sports. Still - and at least we know we haven't been abducted by aliens and replaced by impostors - it really couldn't sound more like us.

 


