AFP

Republicans flexed their new-found political muscle on Sunday by promising a string of investigations into Barack Obama's administration, as the president vowed to make some "corrections".

By seizing the House of Representatives in Tuesday's mid-term elections, Republicans gained the chairmanship of powerful House of Representatives committees that can seek to embarrass the president by calling top aides to testify in public.

"I'm going to go after a lot of things and I'm going to do a lot of investigating," Representative Darrell Issa, who is set to take control of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, told Fox News Sunday.

Former presidents Bill Clinton and George W Bush faced epic showdowns with House Republicans after crushing mid-term defeats in 1994 and 2006 respectively.

For starters, Issa said he was likely to probe allegations the White House offered to give Democratic Representative Joe Sestak an administration post if he stayed out of a Senate primary race.

Sestak won the primary against senator Arlen Specter, the White House's preferred candidate, and ended up narrowly losing to Republican candidate Pat Toomey in Tuesday's mid-term elections.

Other targets are expected to be Obama's sweeping health care reforms and the US Justice Department's handling of alleged voter intimidation by the New Black Panther Party, as well as the handling of the BP oil spill.

The White House has yet to say how it plans to respond and Obama, on a 10-day trip through Asia, remained on the defensive as he offered his most candid appraisal yet of the crushing poll losses.

"People are frustrated," Obama told a meeting with Indian students in Mumbai. "One of the wonderful things about democracy, when the people are not happy, it is their right, obligation and duty to express their unhappiness.

"It requires me to make some mid-course corrections and adjustments," Obama said, while vowing to talk to hunt out areas of agreement with Republicans despite the signs of sharp division in Washington.

Leading Republicans took to the Sunday morning talk shows to hammer the president over everything from over-spending and the economy to taxation and the controversial health care reforms.

"The American people simply did not like what the president and this Congress were doing substantively," Mitch McConnell, the leading Republican in the Senate, told CBS's Face the Nation.

"They didn't like the spending. They didn't like the debt. They didn't like the health care bill. And they wanted to have a mid-course correction. And that's what they voted for."

Republicans will struggle to repeal health care as Obama has the power to veto such a bid, but Tea Party favorite Rand Paul, elected to the Senate in Kentucky, suggested its constitutionality would be challenged at a state level.

"A federal judge in both Florida and Virginia have said, yes, we're going to go forward with this," Paul told ABC's This Week program. "So I think you will see that going forward and we will challenge it in the courts."

Republicans also scent blood over Bush-era tax cuts, which are set to expire on December 31.

After refusing steadfastly during the mid-term campaign to extend the cuts for the richest one per cent of Americans, warning that doing so would add $US700 billion ($A691.63 billion) over ten years to the swollen US deficit, Obama has since signaled he may compromise and offer a temporary extension.

Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty, a leading Republican tipped for a White House run in 2012, conceded that mid-term success wasn't a clear endorsement of his party, which is still widely unpopular according to opinion polls.

"It's not so much that people re-embraced Republicans," he said. "It said they didn't like the direction President Obama and (House Speaker) Nancy Pelosi and the Democratic Congress was taking the nation.

"Now they're at least opening the door to reconsidering supporting Republicans," he told CNN's State of the Union.

"Now we have to govern and lead and produce results. And if we don't, we'll be thrown out in two years."


