A founder of Facebook, Chris Hughes went on to help a US president win office. His next project? To eliminate world hunger, writes Matthew Hall.

IT'S a subzero afternoon in  New York City and Chris Hughes has yet to speak to his old friend  Mark  Zuckerberg.

Hours earlier Time magazine named Zuckerberg its 2010 Person of the Year, a recognition he shares with former US president George W. Bush, Pope John Paul II, Winston Churchill and Joseph Stalin.

It's seven years since Hughes bunkered down in the Harvard dorm room he shared with Zuckerberg and friends Dustin Moskovitz and Eduardo Saverin as they launched thefacebook.com – an internet "social network", effectively an online directory – for fellow students.

Now, 550 million members and one  name tweak later, one out of every 12 people on the planet has a Facebook account, including US President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Julia Gillard.

"Within days of its launching, we realised that thefacebook.com was going to be much bigger than we thought,” Hughes told Bloomberg Businessweek in 2004.

Little did they  know. Facebook has become such a phenomenon that a hit Hollywood movie, The Social Network, examines its beginnings, portraying the four friends in all their expectant Harvard glory.

"It was cool to be  in a movie like that but it is a little bit disappointing it  wasn't more fidelis to the Facebook story," Hughes says.

"Mark had a really good comment that the only thing they got right was his fleeces and his sandals. Everything else was a bit of [writer Aaron] Sorkin's imagination.

"I guess that's just Hollywood and that is what you have got to do to make a blockbuster."

The film has received an interesting postscript in the past week, with a new lawsuit filed by Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss. The brothers allege their payout from Facebook, after they accused  Zuckerberg of stealing their idea, was too small because it undervalued the cost of the company.

Hughes says    Zuckerberg was worthy of the Time honour.  "I haven't had a chance to talk to him about it yet but I am honoured for Mark," he says.  "He has managed to lead Facebook from the germ of an idea, which we had in our dorm room in 2004, into a really important tool for over 500 million people in six years. I think it's quite an accomplishment."

Hughes  himself is no stranger to accomplishment. As perhaps the non-nerd among Facebook's brains trust, Hughes assisted its development in, as he explains, "the non-technical side of the organisation . . . doing a lot of spokesperson work, doing a lot of work on the product and user experience, and the design. Really, anything that  I could help out with."

Zuckerberg was user number four. Hughes, user five. There was no one, two or three.

It would not be hard to win an argument that Facebook has had a major impact on  21st-century life. For many of us, having a small role in such a project might be enough. Hughes, however, can claim a big hand in another of this century's landmarks.

In 2007 he jumped from Facebook to join the pitch for "friend" Barack Obama, then a junior senator from Chicago, to become president of the United States of America.

These were days when it was still widely assumed that Hillary Clinton would win the Democratic nomination and Obama's candidacy was considered promising but idealistic. It was not quite a novelty act but was seen as unlikely to end in winning the White House. Obama, however, had been an early adopter of social technology and had set up a Facebook account long before his presidential tilt began.

Hughes, at the age of 24, became candidate Obama's "director of online organising", a role that would later be credited as one of the key reasons Obama defeated  Senator John McCain in  the 2008 race. Through my.barackobama.com, Hughes corralled and co-ordinated a vast grassroots campaign that translated interest and intention into  votes at the ballot box.

"My.barackobama.com powered 2 million volunteers and an email list of 13 million people who were engaging with the campaign," Hughes says, "through grassroots events, through fund-raising, knocking on doors, making phone calls, all the different pieces that made the 2008 campaign into what it was."

After the  election, Obama campaign manager David Plouffe told the magazine Fast Company: "Chris saw what was possible before anyone else."

While   Zuckerberg 's 24 per cent share in Facebook has yielded almost $7 billion, according to Forbes magazine, Hughes retains a reportedly more modest 1 per cent share – yet probably enough to never have to work again.

He grew up an only child in conservative North Carolina where his father was a paper salesman and his mother a school teacher. Without his parent's knowledge, he applied and won a scholarship to a private boarding school.

"I went to boarding school, southern, religious and straight, and I left boarding school not  being at all religious and not  being straight," Hughes told  Fast Company.

Modest, softly spoken, wearing a dark blue suit, with no tie and the top buttons of a striped shirt undone, Hughes says now that technology is at its most powerful, "when it enables people to do something that they already want to do".

"If there is an existing hunger or thirst – and in the Obama campaign it was for change and reform in Washington – the technology can enable that hunger and thirst to actually turn into something that has concrete results," he says.

Which neatly brings Hughes to his latest venture – Jumo. Launched, quietly, late last year after  12 months of development, Jumo is Hughes's third venture that he hopes can change the world.

If the project were pitched in  a lift it might go something like, "Facebook meets Twitter to change the world for good." Alternatively, Jumo might turn that procrastination and time wasting on the internet into something useful and not so self-absorbed.

"I was trying to figure out how to use the skills I had developed in the world of social change," Hughes says of the project.

"One model would have been to go and work at one organisation which was doing good work. But one of the things that you learn studying, or thinking about international development or the problems here at home, is that no one organisation has a silver bullet.

"Another option was to create a consulting firm in order to help as many of these organisations as we could. But that didn't make a lot of sense because if you're able to help 'a lot' you would only be talking about a few hundred, when there are millions and millions of NGOs and non-profits out there."

The solution? Use Jumo (which translates as "together in concert" from Yoruba, a West African language spoken by about  25 million people) as a clearing house and engagement website linking individuals with charities, non-government organisations.

"It is a platform that would be able to help thousands or potentially tens of thousands of organisations at once and for free," Hughes says. "My theory of change is that there are already millions of people working day in and day out on the ground to deliver on promises on global change.

"We need to strengthen those institutions and help those people in the field. Not create some new-fangled tool on the internet that helps people feel good about what they are doing but might not have a really serious impact.

"This is going to be a marathon not a sprint."

Did we mention that Hughes is 27 years old?

Kids today, huh?


