WASHINGTON: As Tucson farewelled at a memorial service another of the six people shot dead by a gunman 10 days ago, the injured congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords continued to make progress in her recovery.

Her condition was upgraded by doctors from critical to serious, with the 40-year-old, two-term Democrat representative reportedly able to move both her arms and legs, while no longer requiring breathing support.

The developments came as America's political leaders wrestled with how best to respond to the shooting. Some advocated tighter gun controls; others said better mental health detection and treatment services were critical in preventing such tragedies.

Jared Lee Loughner, 22, used a semi-automatic pistol with an expanded magazine clip to reel off 30 rounds in just a few seconds, hitting 20 people who were meeting Ms Giffords outside a supermarket. She was shot in the head. Such magazines had been banned under a 1994 law, which had expired a decade later.

At least two Democrat members of Congress - Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey and Representative Carolyn McCarthy of New York, whose husband was killed and son badly injured in a random shooting on a Long Island train in 1993 - both called for the ban to be reinstated.

Senator Charles Schumer, another New York Democrat, also called on the President, Barack Obama, to compel the military to inform the FBI when it rejected an applicant for drug use. Mr Loughner, who had a history of abuse, was rejected by the army in 2008 after failing a drug test, but that fact was not passed to other agencies because of privacy laws.

However, the chances of tighter gun laws appeared remote, with few Republicans supporting such measures. ''The problem with gun laws is they limit the ability to defend yourself,'' a Republican senator, Tom Coburn, said on NBC. ''The people that are going to commit a crime or are going to do something crazy aren't going to pay attention to the laws in the first place. Let's fix the real problem: here's a mentally deranged person who had access to a gun that should not have had access to a gun.''

In Tucson the Crossroads of the West gun fair reportedly attracted 50 per cent more visitors than normal, and sales of the Glock high-capacity ammunition clips allegedly used by Mr Loughner increased 10-fold, The Daily Telegraph in London reported.

With the issue set to cloud the return of Congress this week, after proceedings were suspended following the shooting, Tucson continued its dignified farewells.

Doctors at the University Medical Centre in Tucson said Ms Giffords had been taken off a ventilator and was breathing through a tube inserted in her throat after a tracheotomy performed at the weekend.

A friend and fellow congresswoman, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, appearing on ABC's Face the Nation, said: ''She's doing great … [and] making progress every day.''

Ms Giffords was moving both sides of her body and was ''showing people that she can communicate well by, you know, holding our hands and moving her arms and legs and looking at us. So she's making great progress.''

with agencies




