With the tender image of a slain little girl joyfully jumping in "rain puddles in heaven," President Barack Obama sought to calm an ugly political mood sown by an Arizona gun rampage.

At a poignant memorial service on Wednesday, Obama used the "gentle, happy spirit" of chubby cheeked nine-year-old Christina Taylor Green to challenge Americans to reject the venom tearing at their democracy.

She was due to be buried later Thursday.

Obama's role in the wake of the tragedy was one common to many US presidents, called upon to summon unity and some higher meaning from the horror of sudden inexplicable death, national crisis or disaster.

This president's most testing rhetorical challenge yet came after a lone gunman pumped bullets into a public meeting hosted by Arizona congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords last Saturday, killing six people and wounding 14.

Obama set out to seek deeper lessons for his country from the grief of the bereaved, and to implore people not to seek political advantage as a row rages over what prompted the rampage.

The speech "was crafted to do exactly what it should," said Jamie McKown of the College of the Atlantic.

"Provide praise for the dead and their sacrifice and then, as all great funeral orations are designed to, to give advice to those of us living, as to how we can honor their sacrifice going forward."

Obama honored each of the dead in turn -- the man who died saving his wife of many years, the judge who dispensed justice for four decades and the great-grandmother devoted to her family.

An emotional high-point came when Obama revealed that Giffords had opened her eyes moments before the service for the first time since she was shot through the brain.

But the enduring memory of the speech was the little girl, who may come to be the face of this tragedy, much as teacher and crewmember Christa McAuliffe became an emblem for the 1986 space shuttle Challenger disaster.

Obama, the father of two young daughters himself, appeared enthralled by the wonder the young girl was developing for American democracy. A school civics project led her to be at the shooting scene to meet her congresswoman.

"I want us to live up to her expectations. I want our democracy to be as good as she imagined it. All of us -- we should do everything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children's expectations," he said.

In the cadence of a preacher, Obama appeared to be challenging his political contemporaries to see their own youthful promise in Christina, and rise above the cynicism and fury of everyday politics.

"If there are rain puddles in heaven, Christina is jumping in them today. And here on Earth, we place our hands over our hearts, and commit ourselves as Americans to forging a country that is forever worthy of her gentle, happy spirit," he said.

Leila Brammer, professor of communication studies at Gustavus Adolphus College, said many saw Christina's loss as the most moving aspect of the tragedy.

"Obama was able to use her innocence and belief in democracy as a powerful call for us to recapture some of that ourselves in working together to solve our problems," she said.

His speech before a 14,000-strong crowd in an Arizona sports arena appeared to strike the right tone following an angry political row that broke out within hours of the shooting.

The emotional range of the address stands in comparison with the best of recent presidential eulogies, from Ronald Reagan's after the Challenger disaster to Bill Clinton's after the Oklahoma City bombing.

And it may take its place alongside Obama's own best efforts, including his race speech in Philadelphia in 2008, his 2004 Democratic campaign speech and the rationale for war he delivered when accepting the Nobel peace prize.

However, the lofty hopes of a new era of civil politics seem far fetched when set against the rancor that rocks US politics.

Obama made draining the partisan swamp one of the rationales for his presidency, but if anything the bitter tone between Republicans and Democrats has worsened since he took office in January 2009.

And at times, as it has waged a fierce partisan war with Republicans, Obama's White House has fired off its own negative rhetoric, especially in the run-up to last November's Republican mid-term election rout.

Still, judging by immediate commentary from conservatives who are usually critical of the president on Twitter, the speech may have succeeded in avoiding further roiling partisan feelings.

It compared favorably in that respect to a video earlier Wednesday issued by conservative favorite Sarah Palin, who accused the media of committing "blood libel" against her after some commentators said her brand of fiery rhetoric may have tipped the Arizona gunman over the edge.


