WASHINGTON: Barack Obama returned to the White House welcomed by a chorus from America's political class hailing him as having transformed his presidency with an artful and heartfelt speech in Tucson.

This was the response not just of Democrats or liberal reporters but also Mr Obama's Republican opponents, who conceded that he had done himself a lot of political good.

In an article headlined ''Obama brings it home'', Gail Collins of The New York Times wrote: ''Maybe President Obama was saving the magic for a time when we really needed it.''

By not pointing fingers or seeking to score political points, pundits said that Mr Obama positioned himself well as he readies his State of the Union address for January 25.

Many contrasted his address with the video message sent out by Sarah Palin, the 2008 vice-presidential contender. She was pilloried across the political spectrum for using the term ''blood libel'' to characterise liberal criticism of conservatives in alleging a ''climate of hate'' had influenced the alleged suspected killer, Jared Loughner.

One of the top Republicans in the country sent an email to Politico's Mike Allen, a premier political reporter, that said: ''Changes everything. Reagan after the Challenger. He finally employed the symbolic power of the presidency. And he did it perfectly.''  Mr Obama had referred to the fate of Christina-Taylor Green, the nine-year-old victim who was born on September 11, 2001. He said: ''If there are rain puddles in heaven, Christina is jumping in them today.''

The wording had echoes of President Ronald Reagan who after the 1985 Challenger space shuttle disaster had said the victims had ''slipped the surly bonds of earth'' to ''touch the face of God''.

In an opinion poll out this week, taken before  he gave his speech, Mr Obama had bounced back from last year's lows. The McClatchy Newspapers-Marist poll had Mr Obama in a winning position against all his likely Republican rivals.  And he'd crush Mrs Palin by 56 to 30 per cent.

Telegraph, London; Tribune Media Services


