DONATIONS as small as $10 are flowing into the Liberal Party's  kitty as  donors step in  to replace the diminishing  corporate donations that once funded  election campaigns.

Small donations made online are emerging as  an important  source of funds for the Opposition Leader, Barry O'Farrell,  as the election approaches.  Thousands of  people have been giving  an average of $25 to support the Coalition's push for power.

Emails are being regularly circulated, encouraging voters to click  on a link to the Coalition's  campaign website to make a donation. Some  gifts are  for $10;  others exceed $500.

A Liberal Party source said the campaign developed after Tony Abbott's strong performance at the Rooty Hill debate during last year's federal campaign. An email was sent  to supporters that night.

By 10am the next  day  the party had raised $25,000, mainly from  people donating $20 to $25.

The state director of the Liberal Party, Mark Neeham, would not  say how much the party had raised  from online donations but said he was very encouraged by the volume of small donations.

''It's not going to fully fund the campaign,'' Mr Neeham said. ''Far from it. But it's a very good start.''

He said Australia  lagged well behind the US, where  Barack Obama's campaign for the presidency was dominated by small donations, but expected it to slowly catch up as a result of   laws  that came into force this month.

Mr Neeham said the party would continue to build its online presence  before the campaign to counter what he  called an ''unfair playing field'' created by Kristina Keneally's reforms to campaign funding.

The  spending by political parties is  limited to $100,000 for each electorate they contest, up to a maximum of $9.3 million, and donations from individuals cannot exceed $2000 a year.

Third parties, such as unions or business groups, can spend up to $1.05 million during an election campaign.

''The new laws allow the unions to spend huge amounts of money on Labor but, as much as business may support the Liberal Party, business likes to back both sides and … the laws clearly favour Labor,'' Mr Neeham said.

Social media, such as Twitter and Facebook,  will also be election campaign tools.

Mr O'Farrell tweets several times a day and  the Premier has more than 12,000 followers on Twitter. Both  have Facebook pages and plan to use YouTube throughout the campaign.

NSW Labor and Ms Keneally's staff will move in together after Australia Day in an office in Pitt Street to run a 24-hour campaign headquarters.

The party admitted  this was a  method usually used by oppositions but  said this would be an ''unconventional campaign''.

The  move was designed to ensure  party strategists could respond immediately to events.

The general secretary of NSW Labor, Sam Dastyari,  would not  give details of the party's fund-raising  but said it would spend the $9.3 million  allowed.


