US officials finally declared BP's broken well in the Gulf of Mexico  "dead" yesterday, five months after the deadly oil rig explosion that  set off one of the costliest and largest environmental disasters ever.

Retired  admiral Thad Allen, the US pointman for the response to the disaster,  said the operation to intersect and cement the deepwater well had been  successfully completed.

"With this development, which has been  confirmed by the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy  Management, we can finally announce that the Macondo 252 well is  effectively dead," Allen said.

"Additional regulatory steps will  be undertaken but we can now state, definitively, that the Macondo well  poses no continuing threat to the Gulf of Mexico," he added.

The  announcement marked an anti-climactic end to a five-month battle to cap a  busted undersea well that gushed 4.9 million barrels (206 million  gallons) of oil into the Gulf of Mexico, the largest maritime spill  ever.

No oil has leaked into the Gulf in the three months since  the well off the Louisiana coast was plugged in a so-called "top kill"  operation, but the US administration insisted that it also be sealed  from the bottom with a relief well.

A final pressure test of the  cement seal was completed at 5:54 am, officials said.

"Today, we  achieved an important milestone in our response to the BP oil spill -  the final termination of the damaged well that sat deep under the Gulf  of Mexico," President Barack Obama said in a statement.

Obama said  there was now a diminished need for the massive response to the spill,  but "we also remain committed to doing everything possible to make sure  the Gulf Coast recovers fully from this disaster."

"My  administration will see our communities, our businesses and our fragile  ecosystems through this difficult time," he said.

BP also pledged  to continue "remedying the harm that the spill caused to the Gulf of  Mexico, the Gulf Coast environment, and to the livelihoods of the people  across the region."

The disaster, which erupted with a massive  explosion on the BP-leased Deepwater Horizon rig, killing 11 workers,  exposed the vulnerability of the oil- and wildlife-rich Gulf of Mexico  to deep sea drilling.

For weeks every effort to plug the well 5000  feet below the surface of the sea fell short as the spreading oil  fouled hundreds of miles of shoreline, closed fishing grounds and  threatened fragile ecosystems.

The Obama administration also  imposed a moratorium on deepwater drilling, setting back another  mainstay of the Gulf economy while the cause of the disaster is  investigated.

Eighty-seven days into the crisis, BP finally  succeeded in placing a giant cap over the well that stopped the flow of  oil into the Gulf.

But the costs were huge, with local livelihoods  disrupted and nearly $US70 billion wiped off BP's market value.

BP,  whose chief executive Tony Hayward was forced to resign, has spent  eight billion dollars trying to contain the disaster and has forecast it  will eventually cost the energy giant more than $US32.2 billion

"Although  the well is now dead, we remain committed to continue aggressive  efforts to clean up any additional oil we may see going forward," Allen  said.

Multiple investigations into the disaster are still under  way and official responsibility has yet to be meted out. An internal BP  investigation laid some of the blame on its contractors.

But BP  America's CEO Lamar Mackay sought to put a positive spin on the lessons  his company has learned from the disaster, saying they would be shared  to prevent a repeat in the future.

"We also believe that the  industry will gain important insights on how to be better prepared to  respond to any future incidents," he said.

AFP


