AFP

US President Barack Obama will meet Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard for the first time next month, on the sidelines of the APEC summit in Japan, the White House says.

The talks will take place in Yokohama at the back end of Obama's 10-day, four-nation tour of Asia and are likely to focus on Afghanistan, trade, the economy and North Korea.

"Australia is obviously one of our closest allies in the region - and the world, as well," said Ben Rhodes, a deputy US national security adviser.

"This will be (Obama's) first bilateral meeting with the new prime minister since her election."

Australia is one of the closest US allies in Afghanistan, and Gillard warned this month her country's forces would need to play a supporting role for years after the 2014 date, when Afghan forces are set to take over security.

She said Afghanistan should never again become a safe haven for extremists and her government was committed to standing by Washington.

"This means more fighting, more violence, it risks more casualties. There will be many hard days ahead," Gillard said in her first address to the national parliament on the war.

The war in Afghanistan has bipartisan political support in Australia, which has about 1550 troops in the country, but the government is facing increasing public pressure as the war stretches on amid mounting casualties.

Gillard was elected prime minister of Australia in a contentious election in August which came after her ouster of predecessor Kevin Rudd threw Australian politics into uproar.

Rudd, who now serves as Australia's foreign minister, was one of the world leaders with whom Obama had bonded most closely on the world stage.

Gillard caused a stir in Australia after returning from her first overseas tour this month, saying that foreign policy was not her passion and that she would rather be in an Australian classroom than meeting world leaders.

She said she was still working through an agenda including Australia's involvement in the Afghan war and the aftermath of the global slump.

Obama has twice postponed visits to Australia this year, once as he pushed to enact his health care reform law and again when the BP oil disaster erupted in the Gulf of Mexico.

Both trips were proposed before Gillard was elected, and no replacement date has been scheduled for the trip.


