WASHINGTON: The presidential commission investigating the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has blamed ''missteps and oversights'' by BP, Transocean, the owner of the Deepwater Horizon rig, and the contractor Halliburton.

It also said those errors were ''rooted in systemic failures'' and could happen again.

The commission said the blowout on April 20 at BP's oil well Macondo was not inevitable but a failure of management.

Officials from all three firms ignored warning signs and failed to take precautions that might have delayed the completion of the well but might also have averted the disaster, it said.

In a chapter released from the final report, which is due next week, the commission said: ''The blowout was not the product of a series of aberrational decisions made by rogue industry or government officials that could not have been anticipated or expected to occur again.

''Rather, the root causes are systemic and, absent significant reform in both industry practices and government policies, might well recur.''

It recounts fateful decisions by all three companies, including the failure to use enough centralisers to keep the pipe in the middle of the well, choices about the type of steel pipe, and failure to heed or share test results that suggested the cement used to seal the well could fail.

It said the evidence to date did not establish whether the failure to use enough centralisers was a direct cause but ''illuminates the flaws in BP's management and design procedures, as well as poor communication between BP and Halliburton''.

William Reilly, a co-chairman of the commission - appointed in May by the President, Barack Obama - said it had concluded the blowout reflected a ''system-wide'' problem in the industry, ''given the documented failings of both Transocean and Halliburton, both of which serve the offshore industry in virtually every ocean''.

His co-chairman, Bob Graham, a former Democrat senator from Florida, said: ''The Macondo blowout was the product of several individual missteps and oversights by BP, Halliburton and Transocean, which government regulators lacked the authority, the necessary resources and the technical expertise to prevent.''

The Interior Department said it had ''already identified, acknowledged, and spent months working aggressively to reform'' offshore drilling and would continue to make changes.

The most detailed descriptions in the chapter released on Wednesday were of communications and decisions by BP, Transocean and Halliburton.

''The immediate cause of the Macondo blowout was a failure to contain hydrocarbon pressures in the well,'' the report said.

''Three things could have contained those pressures: the cement at the bottom of the well, the mud in the well and in the riser, and the blowout preventer.

''But mistakes and failures to appreciate risk compromised each of those potential barriers, steadily depriving the rig crew of safeguards until the blowout was inevitable and, at the very end, uncontrollable.''

Transocean said its crew took appropriate action based on ''the limited information available''.

''Consistent with industry standards, the procedures being conducted in the final hours were crafted and directed by BP engineers and approved in advance by federal regulators,'' it said.

The Washington Post

 


