WASHINGTON: Joe Biden is a career politician who has spent almost his entire adult life in Washington politics, seemingly the antithesis of Barack Obama's hope-and-change message.

Yet with a new political order in Washington, the success of Obama's presidency hinges more and more on the negotiating skills and political instincts of his No. 2.

Facing a revived Republican Party, the White House is expected to increasingly deploy Biden as a presidential surrogate to find compromises and coax reluctant members of Congress into crossing party lines.

Even the Vice-President's penchant for veering off message is being re-evaluated inside the White House as a bridge to ordinary voters who appreciate blunt talk.

A model for Biden's role in the first session of the new Congress, which begins today, was the recent passage of the New START nuclear arms treaty with Russia. Biden, who built a reputation as a foreign policy expert during his 36 years in the Senate, prevailed in an internal White House debate over whether to press for ratification in a lame-duck session.

Some White House advisers had worried that the votes weren't in hand and that a defeat would weaken the President. Biden argued that ratifying the treaty would only get tougher this year, when the Democratic majority in the Senate would shrink by five votes.

He then made about 40 telephone calls to Republican senators, helping win the required two-thirds vote that gave the White House a big foreign policy victory at the close of the year. One of the President's senior advisers, David Axelrod, said Biden proved to be ''an all-star player''.

Not so long ago, White House aides seemed to want the Vice-President benched. They cringed at his repeated gaffes, which have not stopped. In June Biden called a Wisconsin custard shop manager a ''smartass'' after the man refused to take payment and said he would prefer a tax cut instead.

Sometimes the Vice-President's rhetoric goes beyond the President's position, making him a sort of human trial balloon.

In an appearance on the US ABC network's Good Morning America on Christmas Eve Biden said there was ''an inevitability'' that the US would ultimately accept gay marriage. Obama had told a news conference just two days earlier that his views on gay marriage were ''evolving,'' but did not predict where the debate would end up.

Heading into the new year, politicians in both parties say they would like to see Biden take a more prominent role as the White House's main link to Congress. That job belonged to the former chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, for most of Obama's term. But in October Emanuel left to campaign for the mayorship of Chicago.

Even some Democrats complain that under Emanuel's watch, the White House often didn't return calls or follow up on requests from senators. With his deep ties to the Senate, Biden is not apt to make that mistake, they said.

The Vice-President's verbal slip-ups have been the focus of internal White House meetings, officials admit, and coming from these talks is a marked change in attitude. A test case arose in March when Obama signed the healthcare overhaul. Not realising his voice would be picked up by microphones, Biden was caught using an obscenity as he exclaimed to the President: ''This is a big f---ing deal.''

Team Obama decided to celebrate the gaffe, and the White House spokesman, Robert Gibbs issued a tweet: ''And yes, Mr Vice-President, you're right …''

Whether the White House's new, unmuzzled envoy builds on his success depends to a large extent on Republicans.

''It's not for sure that Republicans will see it in their interests to take more responsibility for governing,'' a Biden aide said, ''but to the extent they do, Mr Biden's role can be to help get things done.''

Tribune Media


