WASHINGTON: Jon Huntsman, the US ambassador to China and a Republican, has indicated he may challenge Barack Obama for the White House next year.

The news came as Republicans signalled that they would take a tough line when the new Congress - with a Republican-controlled House - convened this week.

Darrell Issa, the Republican congressman who is assuming responsibility for congressional oversight, called the President's administration ''one of the most corrupt'' and predicted the investigations he plans over the next two years could save taxpayers about $US200 billion ($196 billion).

Republicans pledged to bring on a vote this month to repeal Mr Obama's healthcare reforms.

Mr Huntsman, a former governor of Utah and regarded as a rising star among Republican moderates, was sent to Beijing in 2009 in what was regarded as a bipartisan move by Mr Obama but also a way of neutralising a potential rival.

In an interview with Newsweek, Mr Huntsman, 50, hinted that he was preparing to stand for the presidency.

''I'm really focused on what we're doing,'' he said when asked about presidential aspirations.

''But we won't do this forever and I think we may have one final run left in our bones.''

He declined to rule out standing next year.

Sources close to Mr Huntsman were quoted as saying he met several former political advisers during a trip to the US last month to discuss a potential campaign.

The timing of the interview, just as the 2012 Republican field is being established, and the careful language used, represent at least a trial balloon designed to gauge the likely level of support for a presidential bid.

In effect the remarks possibly represent the announcement of his candidacy and if Mr Huntsman is to stand he is likely to resign his post in Beijing within days.

In the 2008 presidential election Mr Huntsman was the national co-chairman of John McCain's campaign.

He learnt Mandarin when he was a Mormon missionary in Taiwan and has seven children, including two daughters from China and India.

A moderate who favours gay rights and has backed immigration reform and cap-and-trade legislation, he would campaign from the left of the Republican field. Sarah Palin and Newt Gingrich have positioned themselves on the right.

Agencies

 


