AAP

South Australian Deputy Premier Kevin Foley says he will he will not contest the next election - but his exit from politics may come much sooner.

Mr Foley has been under pressure from mid-2010 to step down from the treasury portfolio after cost blowouts for Adelaide's new desalination plant and the Adelaide Oval redevelopment, as well as overspending on healthcare.

Pressure intensified in November after an unprovoked attack in the Adelaide entertainment district in the early hours of the morning left him bruised and battered.

Mr Foley was unable to act as deputy premier in Premier Mike Rann's absence following the attack.

The treasurer has continued to enjoy the full support of Mr Rann but last week said he would step down if his colleagues told him he had reached his use-by date.

As he prepared to visit the United States in his role as defence industries minister, with his two sons in tow, Mr Foley confirmed he would quit politics before the next poll.

"I won't be contesting the next election," he told reporters in Adelaide on Monday.

Mr Foley said he had not been tapped on the shoulder by any of his colleagues and intended to continue as treasurer until his retirement from politics before the next state election, due in 2014.

But it has prompted speculation he will step down from the deputy premiership before parliament is recalled in February.

"I will remain the defence industries minister and that is the exact nature of this trip," Mr Foley said.

"I am not saying anything about my future.

"I won't be contesting the next election and for Labor to have a strong focus maintained on financial management, a treasurer who will be arguing the case for Labor's re-election needs to be somebody who is experienced in this job for a reasonable period of time."

Mr Rann has not commented directly on the speculation but says Mr Foley will make up his own mind about when to go.

"Kevin is going to make up his own mind ... he's got my support to do that ... he's got the support of a lot of others," Mr Rann said.

Mr Rann said Labor had a lot of great talent for the future including Employment Minister Jack Snelling, who is tipped to take over the treasury portfolio from Mr Foley.


