RESIDENTS of Tehran are blaming US-led sanctions for unprecedented levels of air pollution that have repeatedly forced the closure of universities and schools in the past month.

Tehran has long been regarded as one of the world's most polluted cities, but the heavy smog that has recently shrouded its streets has been described as the worst in its history.

The Iranian capital, which is notorious for its traffic congestion, has little wind because it is surrounded by the foothills of a mountain range.

Muhammad Hadi Heydarzadeh, an adviser to Tehran's mayor, said this week that residents were breathing ''poison'' and the government had asked environmental officials not to discuss the air pollution in public.

Mr Hadi Heydarzadeh said the situation was ''critical''.

''What people in Tehran inhaled in the past few weeks was just poison,'' he said.

The smog is said to be the result of locally produced petrol that the government introduced after the imposition in July of US sanctions preventing foreign firms from selling petrol to Iran.

At the time, the President, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, described the sanctions as ''futile'' and said that ''within a week we will reach the phase of self-sufficiency in producing petrol''.

Iran is the world's fourth-largest producer of crude oil but the second-largest importer of petrol, after the US, because it lacks oil refineries.

Locally refined petrol produces high levels of pollution, said Hosseinali Shahriari, the head of the Iranian parliamentary committee for healthcare, who said Iranian petrol contains 10 times the level of contaminants of imported fuel.

In its attempt to deal with the smog crisis, the government has launched small planes to seed clouds and create rain, and closed government offices, universities and schools for at least six days in the past three weeks. Sport competitions, exhibitions and official ceremonies have been postponed.

More and more Tehranis are reporting headaches and difficulty breathing. Hospitals have reported a 40 per cent increase in patients with breathing difficulties. Fathollah Emami, the director of Tehran's Project to Reduce Pollution, said 27 Tehranis die each day from pollution-related diseases.

Guardian News & Media

 


