WASHINGTON: As Republicans celebrated retaking the House of Representatives on Wednesday, across town a ''pretty major retooling'' was under way at the White House: the President's spokesman, Robert Gibbs, announced he was quitting his job for a private consultancy.

His decision adds to the raft of changes within Barack Obama's inner circle ahead of his 2012 re-election push, while mirroring the sense of renewal on Capitol Hill where the new Republican majority formally installed the Ohio representative John Boehner as 61st Speaker of the House.

The White House is expected to name replacements within days for the former chief of staff Rahm Emanuel, who left late last year to take a tilt at becoming mayor of Chicago, and for the departing economics adviser Larry Summers, who is returning to Harvard University.

The banking executive Bill Daley, a former commerce secretary in the Clinton administration and another member of Chicago's political class, is tipped for the former role; Gene Sperling, an adviser to the Treasury Secretary, Tim Geithner, who also worked for President Clinton, the latter.

Also, Mr Obama's 2008 campaign manager, David Plouffe, will join the White House team, as the senior adviser, David Axelrod, shifts gears to spearhead Mr Obama's campaign from Chicago, the first time in decades that a presidential re-election bid has been managed from outside Washington.

Mr Gibbs, who has worked with Mr Obama since his days as a senator from Illinois, is expected to remain a paid advocate for the President from outside the strictures of the White House, while taking on other work.

''The best service I can provide this President is, for the next couple of years, outside this building,'' Mr Gibbs said.

He is expected to give up his role next month and stands to make substantially more than his salary of $US172,000 a year as press secretary.

The new appointments come as Mr Obama looks to apply renewed vigour to job creation by encouraging business to start investing the billions of dollars of cash they have stockpiled during the recession.

Commentators suggested the prospective appointments of Mr Daley and Mr Sperling were geared to get business on-side.

But the shifting political power in Congress that threatens to stymie Mr Obama's legislative program was marked by the installation of 96 ''freshmen'' representatives in the House - 87 of whom are Republicans, beneficiaries of November's midterm landslide.

In a handover ceremony laced with outward expressions of goodwill, as well as a little humour, Mr Boehner received a new gavel made by one of his Cincinnati constituents from Nancy Pelosi, the first woman in the role, who becomes House minority leader.

''The American people have humbled us,'' Mr Boehner told the 435 representatives as well as a gallery packed with relatives, including 10 of his 11 siblings.

''They have refreshed our memories as to just how temporary the privilege to serve is.

''They have reminded us that everything here is on loan from them.

''That includes this gavel, which I accept cheerfully and gratefully, knowing I am but its caretaker.''

Mrs Pelosi also spoke of the transitory nature of power, quoting the late President John Kennedy who, at his inauguration 50 years ago, referred to elected members as ''trustees for the American people and custodians of America's heritage''.

But she also hailed Democrat successes of the past four years, notably the passage of healthcare reform.

 


