AFP

President Barack Obama is poised to cheer a new START and end an era of military discrimination, in a sweet coda to a year marked by anaemic economic growth and a Republican revival.

Obama will sign into law a repeal of a ban on gays serving openly in the military - a long-held liberal dream - while the Senate is expected to ratify a new START nuclear arms deal with Russia, a cornerstone of his foreign policy.

He will travel to the Interior Department in Washington early on Wednesday to sign the law overturning the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy on gay soldiers, amid likely scenes of jubilation from rights activists.

Obama promised to overturn the ban as he vowed to deliver "Change You Can Believe In" during his 2008 campaign, and the new law passed by Congress over the weekend will repair tattered ties with liberal grass-roots activists.

The US Senate meanwhile is expected to reach the end of a tortuous slog and finally ratify the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) with Russia, which Obama has billed as vital to his "reset" of ties with Moscow.

After a fierce Senate battle, 11 Republicans broke with party leaders eager to hand Obama a crushing defeat, rallying more than the two-thirds majority - 60 votes - needed to ratify the pact.

A final vote on the treaty is expected by Wednesday afternoon.

The pact restricts each nation to a maximum of 1550 deployed warheads, a cut of about 30 per cent from a limit set in 2002, and 800 launchers and bombers.

The accord would also grant access to US inspectors who have been unable to monitor Russia's arsenal since the treaty's predecessor lapsed in December 2009.

It will mark a personal milestone for Obama, who turned to arms control issues even before he entered the Senate in 2005, and made a call as president for the eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons from the planet.

The White House has also delivered broad hints that Obama will hold an end-of-year press conference to frame the political mood and position himself for the new realities in a divided Washington next year.

He is expected to then leave to join his family for his annual Christmas vacation in his native Hawaii, either Wednesday or Thursday.

Both legislative wins emerged from a surprisingly productive "lame duck" session of Congress that helped reinvigorate Obama's political fortunes after a humiliating reverse for his Democrats in November's mid-term elections.

The late-year session also included a deal with Republicans to extend tax cuts passed under former president George W. Bush that infuriated liberals because they included a break for the wealthiest Americans.

But Obama, noting the bill included extra unemployment benefits and arguing it will boost the economy, says the legislation was the kind of painful bipartisan compromise needed to get the people's work done in Washington.

The much-needed victories will also mark the end of an era of sorts for Obama as the new Republican-led House of Representatives will block the kind of sweeping social and economic reform legislation that has characterised his presidency.

Instead, Obama will have to fight a fierce battle on the budget and protect his signature political victories, like the healthcare reform and regulatory reform bills passed earlier this year.

The focus will inexorably turn to the 2012 elections as Republicans seek to thwart his campaign for a second term while the president hopes for a political payoff from a revived economy and a fall in unemployment, currently at 9.8 per cent.

Obama's approval ratings have held remarkably steady this year - between 45 and 50 per cent in most polls - hardly terminal for a first-term president.

But without a substantial fall in unemployment, the president will be hard pressed to make the case to voters that he deserves another two years in the White House.

Obama's aides argue that the recent legislation could provide a template for future work across the aisle.

"I think there is a lesson of the importance that these issues have with not just those on Capitol Hill but with the American people," White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said.

But given the recent history of gridlock, anger and fierce partisanship on Capitol Hill, few observers expected a new era of compromise.


