AUSTRALIANS are paying an increasing share of health costs out of their own pockets in contrast to most other countries.

Out-of-pocket health bills for the average person have climbed to $889 as Australians pay the cost not only of steadily rising health bills but also shoulder a larger burden  of health costs.

In many other countries, citizens are paying a lower share.

The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare figures released yesterday show that Australia's direct bills were somewhat above the $860 average for Western countries in 2008, the latest available figures.

The institute says that while Australians personally paid out 17.7 per cent of health costs, those in other Western countries had to shoulder just 14.4 per cent.

Out-of-pocket costs include not only gap medical and drug bills but also personal costs for spectacles and other aids and appliances, but not health insurance premiums.

The growth in health costs rose  by 5.4 per cent in the decade,  compared with 3.4 per cent in the United States.

Gap payments to doctors were one of the big generators of increased out-of-pocket costs, despite attempts by the previous Coalition government to shrink high medical bills through the Medicare safety net and campaigns against surprise gap medical costs.

The institute figures show that over the decade to 2008,  the patient's contribution to the total medical bill grew at a much faster rate than the government's share.

The federal government's real funding of medical services, through Medicare, rose at an average of 3.5 per cent a year over the decade and the individual's costs grew at 4.8 per cent.

The amount borne by health insurance funds soared by an average 11.3 per cent a year, driven largely  by the funds' attempts to prevent their members receiving surprise bills after surgery in a private hospital.

The institute's director, Dr Penny Allbon, said  virtually all areas of  expenditure topped  inflation  in the 2008 and 2009 financial years, including doctors, health research, dental services, ambulances, aids and appliances and community health services.

The surging cost of healthcare was confronting people with more costs when there was a pressing need for reforms to make the system more efficient and accessible, the chief executive of the Consumers Health Forum, Carol Bennett, said.

"All too often the profit motive that drives some elements of our health industry ignores the need to keep our world-class health system sustainable," Ms Bennett said.

"We need to reduce the number of people being forced, needlessly, to use our public hospital system, provide better integrated and more flexible primary healthcare services and press ahead with the greater investment in preventative health measures announced recently by the federal government."

The NSW opposition health spokeswoman, Jillian Skinner, said the figures  highlighted the poor record of the state Labor government which had presided over the lowest growth  in health spending in the Commonwealth - a 3.4 per cent growth rate over the decade compared with the Australian average of 3.9 per cent.


