WASHINGTON: Republicans are to flex their newfound political muscle within days of the swearing in of the 112th Congress, promising a vote within a week on the repeal of Barack Obama's historic healthcare reform.

The move signifies a bold challenge to the President's legislative agenda and threatens to dash hopes for a renewed spirit of bipartisanship in Washington.

Republicans dominate the new House of Representatives (242 members to 193), so the vote for repeal is expected to succeed in that chamber.

But it is almost certain to be defeated in the Senate where Democrats retain a slender majority. Failing that, President Obama could veto any repeal.

Though doomed, the tactic is part of an aggressive start to 2011 by Republicans buoyed by big wins in November's midterm elections and promises to attack ''out-of-control'' federal spending. They announced plans to follow through on their pledge to slash $US100 billion from the federal budget, targeting all departments except Defence and Homeland Security, a move that Democrats say could bring big job cuts and threaten economic recovery.

Adding to such fears are tough-talking new state governors from both sides of politics who plan to slash spending in a bid to rein in the deficits of several big US states, a move that California's Jerry Brown, who was sworn in on Monday, insisted would ''demand courage and sacrifice''.

The new Congress is due to be sworn in on Wednesday (tomorrow morning, Sydney time) with many of the 63 Republicans who have replaced Democrats looking to honour the conservative agenda of their Tea Party supporters.

The incoming Speaker, John Boehner, heralded the party's tough stance, saying: ''The American people want a smaller, more accountable government. And starting Wednesday, the House of Representatives will be the American people's outpost in Washington DC.

''We are going to fight for their priorities: cutting spending, repealing the job-killing healthcare law and helping get our economy moving again.''

Republicans have derided the healthcare reform as a threat to jobs because it transfers some medical subsidies from companies to the government-run Medicare. However the changes are due, ultimately, to deliver budget savings. And some measures are likely to be popular with patients, such as the bigger subsidies for prescription drugs that are due to start this year.

Even so, a spokesman for the Republicans' majority leader-elect, Eric Cantor, insisted: ''ObamaCare failed to lower costs as the President promised that it would and does not allow people to keep the care they currently have if they like it. That is why the House will repeal it next week.''

But Senate Democrats gave notice that they would fight those efforts.

On the spending front, Republicans have yet to reveal where they would make budget cuts, but they face two early tests: they will have to decide whether to pass a spending bill needed to keep the wheels of government turning, and in March Congress will vote on whether to raise the government's debt limits.

 


