Another shooting massacre in the US, but this time the rhetoric of its politicians is at issue, rather than its gun laws, writes Simon Mann.

WHO knows exactly what was in Jared Lee Loughner's head last Saturday? Or what caused his deteriorating mental state over recent years?

Is it not simply enough to learn from Zane Gutierrez, who used to shoot tin cans with Loughner for fun, that the 22-year-old was ''a nihilist … loves causing chaos … was sick in the head''?

No dotted line appears to exist between the man who allegedly shot 20 people outside a Tucson supermarket and the toxic slanging match of America's political classes that has dominated recent debate and was instantly labelled a prime suspect in triggering the murderous act.

Levelling a charge of incitement against those who have resorted to gun metaphors might be as fraught as claiming a link between violent video games and violence itself. But in the end, it didn't matter. Six people were dead, and perception became a part of reality.

''I don't pretend to say there's a causal link, but it strikes me, when there are people like this fellow, who already live on the borders of society, that political vitriol can kind of push them into the dark side and bad things can happen,'' said Bill Hileman, whose wife, Susan, was among the injured.

''I'd like to see more civility. I'd like to see less blame. I'd like to see more constructive thinking on the part of our politicians. More problem-solving, less gotcha.

''I'd like this to be a big time-out for America to catch its breath and determine what we want to be.''

It seems clear that Loughner is a mentally disturbed wannabe assassin whose alleged rampage transformed a mid-morning mingling of shoppers and constituents eager to chat with their congressional representative, into a chaotic fight for life over death. Insanity may yet be his legal plea.

Kicked out of community college because of his increasingly disruptive behaviour, Loughner was identified by one fellow student as the kind of guy ''whose picture you see on the news, after he has come into class with an automatic weapon''.

''He scares the crap out of me,'' wrote mature-age student Lynda Sorensen, 52, in an email to friends. Indeed, the accused man's subsequent police mugshot appeared to embody the maniacal.

But another part of the narrative focused on Loughner's possible inspiration, on his eclectic taste in political treatise as well as literature - the writings of Hitler, Karl Marx, J. M. Barrie, George Orwell and Harper Lee among them - and on his rambling postings on YouTube, which resembled those of an extreme right-wing conspiracy theorist who believes the US government uses grammar to control people's minds.

The most incriminating evidence of a link to the acrimonious debate waged by radio and TV shock jocks and by political campaigners quick to portray their opponents as evil and anti-America was the distinctly anti-government tone of Loughner's online posts and the fact that his primary target was an elected representative, the Democratic congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, whose politics did not appear to square with his own. But that was about the strength of it, and early opinion polls showed six out of 10 Americans disbelieved any connection.

And while not acknowledging any links existed between the rhetoric of his on-air stars - namely Glen Beck and even the presidential aspirant Sarah Palin - the boss of Fox News, Roger Ailes, said he had told his hosts to ''tone it down''.

''I told all of our guys, 'Shut up, tone it down, make your argument intellectually','' Ailes said in a conversation published on the hip-hop website Global Grind. ''You don't have to do it with bombast.''

The tragedy gave a nation pause to reflect, not only on the inflammatory political rhetoric that has partnered Barack Obama's first two years in the White House - notably in response to his historic healthcare reforms and during a bitterly contested midterm congressional election campaign - but also on Americans' unfettered access to guns, as well as the challenge of detecting and dealing with mental illness.

While the invective has arisen from both ends of the political spectrum, prominent examples of violent imagery have undeniably resided mostly on the right, territory in which Tea Party activists and their belle, Palin, have hammered their stakes.

Palin et al have mastered what the New York Times columnist Paul Krugman has branded ''eliminationist rhetoric''- her famously telling conservatives and ''lovers of America'': ''Don't retreat, instead reload!'', and publishing the now notorious map that marked the districts of vulnerable Democrats with the crosshairs of a rifle's sights.

Others have happily chimed in: the Tea Party-endorsed challenger to Senator Harry Reid in Nevada, Sharron Angle, outraged liberals by warning that people were considering ''Second Amendment remedies'' to bring the federal government under control, a reference to Americans' constitutional right to own guns.

''What can we do to turn this county around? I'll tell you, the first thing we need to do is take Harry Reid out,'' she declared.

The Conservative Florida radio host Joyce Kaufman told a Tea Party crowd, ''If ballots don't work, bullets will''; the Alabama Republican Rick Barber campaigned with an ad in which an actor portraying George Washington signed off with ''gather your armies''; the Republican congresswoman Michelle Bachmann urged her constituents to be ''armed and dangerous'' in readiness for a debate on an energy tax, saying: ''We need to fight back. Thomas Jefferson told us having a revolution every now and then is a good thing, and the people - we the people - are going to have to fight back hard if we're not going to lose our country.''

And in the campaign for Arizona's 8th District, Giffords had faced off against Jesse Kelly, another Republican carrying the imprimatur of the Tea Party, who held a gun-themed fund-raiser, inviting supporters to ''Get on target for victory in November''. ''Help remove Gabrielle Giffords from office,'' he urged. ''Shoot a fully automatic M16 with Jesse Kelly.''

The Democrats were not immune from invoking similar imagery, the most noteworthy bit of lunacy a TV campaign ad released by ex-governor Joe Manchin in the coalmining state of West Virginia that showed the Senate candidate firing his rifle at a copy of his own party's cap-and-trade energy policy ''because it's bad for Virginia''.

In a nation where life and guns co-exist, and people fight tenaciously to keep it that way despite the fact that 100,000 Americans a year are killed or injured by them, is it any wonder that politics and violence at times intersect?

And in a land where the oath of allegiance demands that presidents ''preserve, protect and defend the constitution'', including its Second Amendment, is gun control ever likely to find a political champion?

In the south-west, a candidate opposing guns cannot exist, let alone in a frontier city like Tucson, barely an hour's drive from Tombstone, the home of the OK Corral and legendary lawman Wyatt Earp.

Giffords, naturally, was pro-guns, even owning her own Glock pistol, the same make as that used by Loughner to shoot her through the head. ''I have a Glock 9mm, and I'm a pretty good shot,'' she had boasted only last year.

But she had become increasingly exasperated by gun violence, commenting after the shooting of a deputy sheriff who was on patrol in a border area used by drug smugglers: ''What will it take? Who else will be shot? How much more violence must we endure?''

As lax as gun laws generally are, US states passed 47 laws in 2009 easing firearms restrictions further. And last year, the Supreme Court upheld a challenge to Chicago's 28-year handgun ban. All but two US states allow people to carry a concealed weapon: Arizona allows it without demanding background checks and recently lifted a ban on carrying concealed weapons into bars.

Congress also allowed the so-called assault weapons ban to expire in 2004. Had the ban, which restricted access to more lethal weapons, remained in place, it is unlikely that Loughner would have got hold of an extended magazine that allowed him to fire 30 rounds in rapid succession. That the ban remains in limbo almost four years after Seung-Hui Cho used two semi-automatic pistols, including a Glock 9-millimetre, to kill 32 people and wound 25 at Virginia Tech, confounds gun-control advocates. The issue was not about the second amendment, wrote Gail Collins in The New York Times, but ''about a technology that the founding fathers could never have imagined''.

Guns worried Susan Hileman, too, long before Loughner shot her three times and took deadly aim at her young friend, nine-year-old Christina-Taylor Green, a vibrant and inquisitive primary school pupil who was attending Giffords's kerbside political chat to learn more about American democracy at work.

''Loaded guns are an issue for me here in Arizona, as I watch our state legislature discuss bills allowing high school teachers, or college teachers, or patrons of eating and drinking establishments, to carry concealed weaponry,'' she wrote last year on the blog that she devoted to musings about life and politics.

But she also feared that ''respect for differences of opinion has taken an ugly turn''.

Addressing the issue in Wednesday's commemoration for the victims before 27,000 people in Tucson, President Barack Obama urged Americans to put civility ahead of rancour. ''And if … their death helps usher in more civility in our public discourse, let us remember it is not because a simple lack of civility caused this tragedy - it did not - but rather because only a more civil and honest public discourse can help us face up to the challenges of our nation in a way that would make them proud.''

Of Christina-Taylor, he paid special tribute, not only as President but as the father also of a nine-year-old daughter. ''I want our democracy to be as good as Christina imagined it. I want America to be as good as she imagined it. All of us - we should do everything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children's expectations.''

The popular political blogger Andrew Sullivan offered a pledge: ''To rate this address on any political meter would be to demean it. The President wrested free of politics tonight and spoke of greater things. I pledge myself to try and follow his advice and debate with vigour and spirit and candour and bluntness, but with more civility, more empathy, and, yes, more love.''

But back in Washington, at least two congressmen - the Utah Republican Jason Chaffetz and the North Carolina Democrat Heath Shuler - said they intended ''packing heat'' more often when meeting constituents in future.

And others seemed resigned to merely a truce in the high-octane political sport of baiting and debating. Peter King, a Republican congressman from New York, who proposed a law banning people from carrying a weapon within 300 metres of any elected official, said political language might be modified in the short term ''but, despite the enormity of this tragedy, probably, and too soon, we'll be back to the screaming and yelling.''

Blaming people, Palin or otherwise, for what happened in Tucson was ''ludicrous'', said the conservative blogger Erick Erickson, of redstate.com. ''Frankly, we're not going to be able to change the tone as long as we have 24-hour news channels and the internet … Too many people earn a really good living pushing this tone and this hate.''

 


