AP

A gunman fired a semiautomatic weapon at a busy supermarket on Saturday during a public gathering for Democrat Gabrielle Giffords, wounding her and killing Arizona's chief federal judge and five others in an attempted assassination that left Americans questioning whether divisive politics had pushed the suspect over the edge.

The shooting targeted Giffords and left the three-term congresswoman in critical condition after a bullet passed through her head. A shaken President Barack Obama called the attack "a tragedy for our entire country".

Giffords, 40, is a moderate Democrat who narrowly won re-election in November against a conservative tea party-aligned candidate who sought to throw her from office over her support of the historic healthcare reform law. Anger over her position became violent at times, with her Tucson office vandalised after the House of Representatives passed the overhaul last March and someone showing up at a recent gathering with a weapon.

Police say the shooter was in custody, and was identified as Jared Loughner, 22. His motivation was not immediately known, but Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik described him as mentally unstable and possibly acting with an accomplice.

Dupnik said Giffords was among 13 people wounded in the melee that killed six people - including nine-year-old Christina Greene, 30-year-old Gifford aide Gabe Zimmerman, and US District Judge John Roll.

The 63-year-old judge had just stopped by to see his friend Giffords after attending Mass. Dupnik said the rampage ended only after two people tackled the gunman.

Also killed were 76-year-old Dorothy Murray, 76-year-old Dorwin Stoddard, and 79-year-old Phyllis Scheck, investigators said.

Mark Kimball, a communications staffer for Giffords, described the scene as "just complete chaos, people screaming, crying". The gunman fired at Giffords and her district director and started shooting indiscriminately at staffers and others standing in line to talk to the congresswoman, Kimball said.

Giffords spokesman C.J. Karamargin said three Giffords staffers were shot. One died, and the other two are expected to survive. Giffords had worked with the judge in the past to line up funding to build a new courthouse in Yuma, and Obama hailed him for his nearly 40 years of service.

An uncle of the nine-year-old girl told the Arizona Republic that a neighbour was going to the event and invited her along because she had just been elected to the student council and was interested in government.

Dr Peter Rhee of the University of Arizona Medical Center said Giffords was conscious and following commands.

Officials originally said they were "very optimistic" about Giffords' chances for recovery, but later on Saturday night said they had "guarded optimism" about her chances for survival. She could face additional surgery if complications develop.

"She's fighting for her life," said Obama, who called for the nation to come together after the shooting.

Giffords' husband, Mark Kelly, a NASA Shuttle astronaut, arrived in Tucson on Saturday evening aboard a NASA jet to join his wife.

The sheriff blamed the vitriolic political rhetoric that has consumed the country, much of it occurring in Arizona.

"When you look at unbalanced people, how they respond to the vitriol that comes out of certain mouths about tearing down the government. The anger, the hatred, the bigotry that goes on in this country is getting to be outrageous," he said. "And unfortunately, Arizona, I think, has become the capital. We have become the mecca for prejudice and bigotry."

The shooting comes amid a highly charged political environment that has seen several dangerous threats against politicians, but nothing that reached the point of actual violence.

Law enforcement officials said members of Congress reported 42 cases of threats or violence in the first three months of 2010, nearly three times the 15 cases reported during the same period a year earlier. Nearly all dealt with the healthcare bill, and Giffords was among the targets.

The reaction to the shooting rippled across the country as Americans were aghast at the sight of such a violent attack on a sitting member of congress. The shooting cast a pall over Washington as politicians of all stripes denounced the attack as a horrific. Capitol police asked members of Congress to be more vigilant about security in the wake of the shooting. Obama dispatched his FBI chief to Arizona.

Giffords expressed concerns about the overheated political climate before the shooting. In an interview after her office was vandalised, she referred to the animosity against her by conservatives, including former Republican vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin's decision to list Giffords' seat as one of the top "targets" in the November midterm elections.

"For example, we're on Sarah Palin's targeted list, but the thing is, that the way that she has it depicted has the crosshairs of a gun-sight over our district. When people do that, they have to realise that there are consequences to that action," Giffords said in an interview with MSNBC.

In the hours after the shooting, Palin issued a statement in which she expressed her "sincere condolences" to the family of Giffords and the other victims.

During his campaign effort to unseat Giffords in November, Republican challenger Jesse Kelly held fundraisers where he urged supporters to help remove Giffords from office by joining him to shoot a fully loaded M-16 rifle. Kelly is a former Marine who served in Iraq and was pictured on his website in military gear holding his automatic weapon and promoting the event.

"I don't see the connection," between the fundraisers featuring weapons and Saturday's shooting, said John Ellinwood, Kelly's spokesman. "I don't know this person, we cannot find any records that he was associated with the campaign in any way. I just don't see the connection.

"Arizona is a state where people are firearms owners - this was just a deranged individual."


