AUSTRALIA'S first federal government to be led by a woman has come under fire for issuing a women's health policy without announcing more funding for struggling women's services.

The first national women's health policy in 21 years has declared a key object of the policy is to ensure women ''have access to the right healthcare at the right time''.

The Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, and Minister for the Status of Women, Kate Ellis, released the policy yesterday, saying it would target chronic disease among women, ''the greatest challenge to women's health over the next two decades''.

The only new government funding announced yesterday was $5.3 million to finance a longitudinal study on women's health.

Gwen Gray, the convener of the Australian Women's Health Network, welcomed the policy but expressed disappointment that no funding had been announced to give effect to the aims of the policy or to support women's health services, which had struggled for years in the face of ''seriously insufficient funding''.

''Without a funded women's health program to support services implementation, the new policy runs the risk of becoming a piece of paper promoting high-sounding ideals,'' Dr Gray said.

The network was ''extremely disappointed that the important role played by women's health centres has been overlooked''.

The 140-page policy document said that although women's health had improved significantly in the past 20 years, some, particularly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, experienced markedly poorer health compared to others.

A key challenge was to address the inequalities flowing from socio-economic determinants which played a role in health outcomes.

The policy identified four priority issues for new action: the prevention of chronic disease through the control of risk factors, mental health and wellbeing, sexual and reproductive health and healthy ageing.

It identified five policy goals, including the need to highlight the significance of gender as a key determinant of women's health and well-being, and to acknowledge that women's health needs differed depending on their stage of life.

The policy cites an international study finding that Australian women had the word's highest level of educational attainment. It also shows that about 50 per cent of adult women have low understanding of essential health information and of how the health system works.

Darlene Cox, the executive director of Canberra's Health Care Consumers Association, said she was glad the policy focused on the needs of marginalised women but she would have liked the document to have given stronger support to better information services for women's health.

''There's a lot of mythology around the health system and the medicalisation of our health rather than the well-being model we really aspire to,'' she said.

The Public Health Association of Australia welcomed the policy's emphasis on the prevention of chronic disease, and on sexual and reproductive health.

The association's president, Professor Helen Keleher, called on the government to integrate the policy direction with the government's proposals for the Medicare Locals community health organisations.

 


