PORT-AU-PRINCE: The former dictator Jean-Claude ''Baby Doc'' Duvalier has made a surprise return to Haiti in the midst of a political vacuum left by disputed presidential elections.

Returning  for the first time after 25 years in the political wilderness, most of them spent in exile in France, Mr Duvalier  told reporters at the airport on Sunday: ''I've come to help.''

The sudden re-emergence of the 59-year-old has only added to the intrigue in earthquake-ravaged Haiti, as efforts to find a successor to President Rene Preval have fallen into disarray.

Mr Duvalier's partner Veronique Roy, who was accompanying him, described how the former dictator bent to his knees and kissed the ground as he set foot on home soil for the first time since his overthrow in 1986.

Ms Roy suggested the couple's return had been prompted by the devastating earthquake almost exactly a year ago that killed nearly a quarter of a million Haitians.

''That was the trigger,'' she said. ''It's so emotional. We were not expecting this welcome.''

A delegation of Mr Duvalier's former cabinet ministers greeted him at the airport along with hundreds of supporters outside cheering as he left in a police-escorted motorcade.

But many of Haiti's older generation will remember the 28 combined years of Duvalier family rule as a time of repression carried out by a rapacious secret police called the Tonton Macoutes.

''Baby Doc'' Duvalier came to power in 1971, succeeding his repressive father Francois ''Papa Doc'' Duvalier at his death.

He sought to similarly control the poverty-ridden country with an iron fist - barring opposition,  rubber-stamping his own laws and pocketing government revenue. He ruled Haiti for 15 years until a popular uprising in 1986, when opponents  rallied in the streets.

Like his enemy Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was driven from power in 2004, Mr Duvalier was urged to step down by the United States and left the country on a US Air Force plane.

Since then he has been involved in a long legal battle to keep millions of dollars held in Swiss bank accounts, as Haiti has sought to repatriate the funds with help from Swiss authorities.

In February the Swiss government said it would keep Mr Duvalier's assets frozen after its effort to return about $US4.6 million of allegedly embezzled funds to Haiti was blocked by the Swiss Supreme Court.

Mr Duvalier arrived to find the country in almost as much turmoil as when he left. One year after a catastrophic earthquake flattened the  country, much of the capital Port-au-Prince remains in ruins and a cholera epidemic has claimed 3790 lives since mid-October.

And Haiti is wrestling with the results of  elections in November that sparked deadly riots over allegations of vote-rigging by the ruling party.

Violent protests flared  when the results of the first round of the presidential election were announced last month, revealing that a popular singer, Michel Martelly, had failed to advance, falling slightly behind the ruling party candidate, Jude Celestin.

International monitors have called for Mr Celestin, the hand-picked candidate of Mr Preval, to step aside before a second round run-off with the front-runner Mirlande Manigat, a former first lady.

Agence France-Presse


