The past year was a first for women and dangerous for many, writes Damien Murphy.



THE world designated 1975 International Women's Year but Australia, no country for women old or young, clearly deferred it for 35 years.

The sight of Julia Gillard being sworn in as prime minister by the Governor-General, Quentin Bryce, in June was surely as women-on-top as it gets.

There were other moments: the sight of Jessica Watson and Oprah Winfrey sailing into Sydney, Jacki Weaver's Academy Award-worthy role in Animal Kingdom, Kristy Fraser-Kirk's sexual harassment court case victory and, visiting Noosa Heads, Kathy Kohner Zuckerman, now 69, still looked the Californian beach goddess her father wrote about in his 1957 book Gidget.

Of course, Kristina Keneally just pipped them all 13 months back, then throughout the year she soldiered on stoically, surviving long enough to lead her government's fast-shrinking remnants. In a campaign already rudely dubbed ''Weekend at Kristina's'', her job will be to carry Labor's stinking corpse through to the March election.

A good year for women, 2010 was for many others also a year of living dangerously, a time of great unpredictability, the sort of abstract Zeitgeist that often accompanies the end of a decade.

The Australian dollar soared, floodwaters supplanted the Big Dry, Australian cricket and rugby league low-scored - Ricky Ponting phoned in a captaincy and News Ltd-owned Melbourne Storm and the Canberra Raiders' Joel Monaghan were revealed as cheats, the former with salary caps, the latter with a labrador. The unlikely anarchist Julian Assange became the modern aphorism, one man's terrorist is another's freedom fighter, thanks to his WikiLeaking; the China-based Rio Tinto mining executive Stern Hu was convicted of industrial espionage and thrown to the pandas; and the Victorian murderer who enjoyed a latter-day career as a glamorised television series thug, Carl Williams, appears to have been murdered in what proved that most perilous of places, protective custody.

Internationally, it was especially dangerous.

Greece, Spain, Italy, Portugal and Ireland went cold turkey after mainlining the welfare state too long and too ravenously. The rest of Europe is now experiencing their withdrawal pains. There were earthquakes in Haiti, Chile, China and New Zealand, tsunamis in Chile and Indonesia and a killer crowd stampede in Cambodia. The US President, Barack Obama, evolved into Mr Unpopular, the Democrats lost the midterm elections and Sarah Palin sailed serenely on, ably supported by the cast and crew from the Tea Party. The US served notice of its intention to quit Iraq and Afghanistan and allowed gays to serve openly. Pope Benedict XVI gave his blessing to condoms to combat HIV. North Korea threatened. Pakistan flooded then unravelled. Labor lost England. Amid global joy, 33 Chilean miners were rescued. Some 200 others died underground in New Zealand, China, Colombia and Uganda.

Not unlike Hal the computer in 2001: A Space Odyssey, the social networking websites Twitter and Facebook assumed lives of their own, the latter even starring in a movie biography. And just as baby boomers hit retirement, their most subversive hero, Holden Caulfield, succumbed to old age.

It was even a dangerous year for weather - climate change slipped off political radar screens.

But perhaps the most dangerous place in the world was Australian politics.

A prime minister vanished. The last time Australians unexpectedly lost one was just before Christmas 1967 when Harold Holt went swimming.

Holt and Rudd have much in common. Their disappearances were never fully explained, each won one landslide election and their achievements in power were few.

Holt followed long-time conservative prime minister Robert Menzies into the top job but had become isolated from colleagues, who were thinking of dumping him. The waves beat them to it. Or did they? Holt had been thinking of quitting anyway. Still, some consider his disappearance during a mid-morning swim at Cheviot Beach on Victoria's Mornington Peninsula was suicide by saltwater. Others thought he made it to a waiting Communist Chinese submarine.

Forty years later, the Mandarin-speaking Rudd replaced a long-time conservative. As with Holt, he was a politician lacking friend, faction and opinion poll popularity. When the Herald ran a front-page story that one of his minions had sounded out Labor colleagues for support, Gillard was so incensed she had to stand against him for the good of the party. He was gone. He stood aside on June 24. Rumours surfaced immediately of another Chinese submarine surfacing off the coast. Rudd was exchanged for a foreign minister.

Gillard pulled off an enviable political double: assassination and little aftermath.

She set in train the downfall of the man who won government for Labor nearly three years earlier, lost the election that her disloyalty to Rudd was designed to save, then seduced a couple of canny country bumpkins, Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, who enabled her to pick the election deadlock.

Their reward? More power than they ever dreamed of. Copious barrels of bacon started falling on their electorates.

But Gillard was rejected by one swain: Bob Katter. The eccentricities displayed during his brief turn in the national spotlight during the courtship earned him the sobriquet ''Mad Katter'' but in reality he is a living non sequitur. The son of a longtime National Party federal MP, Katter not only threw eggs at the Beatles during their 1964 Australia tour but also fled the Queensland branch to stand as an independent when Pauline Hanson sashayed into his heartland in 2001. Gillard put the hard word on Katter but, unable to buck his father's conservative DNA, he refused to get into bed with Labor, a rejection likely to result in his hard-scrabble far north Queensland electorate receiving even less pork barrel largesse than has been its lot during his time in federal politics.

For the Greens, the election was a great fillip but not without danger.

They will hold the balance of power in the Senate by the middle of the year and their man in Melbourne, Adam Bandt, achieved the party's first presence in the House of Representatives. But success appeared to go to their heads and the Greens leadership precociously dreamed of sharing government with Victorian Labor.

That was until the Coalition leader, the Liberal Ted Baillieu, took one of the year's few principled political stands and put the Greens in their place. He refused to preference them and won government to boot. The morning he was to be sworn in, Baillieu celebrated by swimming a few laps in his budgie smugglers for morning breakfast television.

The swimming costumes were seen as a form of political suicide for much of the year.

Labor politicians would not be seen dead in them. Few of their supporters would either. They are favoured by people with water views. They tend to vote Liberal.

Tony Abbott is well aware of the politics of budgie smugglers.

One of the first things he did after disposing of Malcolm Turnbull was to pull on a pair. Budgie smugglers formed the basis of Abbott's early political strategy - along with stunts around Canberra and environs attacking the government's building the education revolution and home insulation schemes and its ''great big new tax'' regime, then announcing a new tax himself to pay for a maternity leave scheme.

The stunts and hypocrisy invited derision. But the budgie smugglers did the most damage. They turned him into a satirist's dream and blurred his message. Things shaped up disastrously for Abbott in his first months as leader. His opinion poll rating was nosing down, Rudd was wiping the floor with him.

Then came Port Macquarie.

At dawn on Sunday, March 28, Abbott - wearing goggles and budgie smugglers - plunged into the Hastings River and for the next 13 hours and 57 seconds swam, pedalled and ran in the Ironman Australia Triathlon.

Given the number of fellow athletes admitted to Port Macquarie Hospital after the race, it was a risky thing for then 52-year-old Abbott. But for a leader of the opposition to seek such a public opportunity to fall flat on your face was dangerous, foolhardy and mad. Had Abbott failed to finish, death might have been preferable. But no sooner had he staggered across the finishing line in 1186th place, than he was off on a marathon bike ride from Melbourne to Sydney.

He continued pedalling and rode down Gillard in the election campaign, surprising everyone from the press gallery to his party, maybe even himself but probably Turnbull most of all.

Turnbull's hope of leading the Liberals one day now must rest mainly on Abbott's continuation of his dangerous triathlon career.

Abbott had Gillard's predecessor to thank for his surprise showing. Rudd kindly came to Abbott's assistance in April when he backed away from his emissions trading scheme and sent Labor voters scurrying towards the Greens. The Messiah-like opinion poll ratings Rudd had enjoyed since his stunning 2007 election victory vanished overnight.

Outside Canberra, the Indian Ocean proved to be a most dangerous place too, especially in Australian waters.

WikiLeaks's Yank in the ranks of the ALP, Mark Arbib, a man devoted to focus group-tested policy making, armed Gillard with asylum seekers at her first prime ministerial press conference.

''I can understand that Australians are disturbed when they see boats arrive on our shores unannounced,'' Gillard said.

''I can understand that Australians are disturbed by that. I can understand that sense of anxiety. This country is a sanctuary, it's our home so we've got a responsibility to manage our borders and manage the question of asylum seekers in the best possible way.

''I've got no truck at all with elevating and fear-mongering about a problem for political advantage which is what I believe the opposition is seeking to do. But I am full of understanding of the perspective of the Australian people that they want strong management of our borders and I will provide it.''

Both government and opposition party rooms let out the word that asylum seekers were the issue on everybody's minds in the western Sydney electorate of Lindsay. Asylum seekers went on to become a big part of the election campaign sturm und drang. The Labor MP David Bradley narrowly retained his seat and the issue drifted away on the political tide. Then just over two weeks ago a people smuggling boat sank off Christmas Island with the loss of at least 30 lives.

A cruel sea.




