AP

A magnitude-7.1 earthquake has shaken southern Chile, prompting tens of thousands of people to flee the coast for higher ground amid fears it could generate a tsunami like the one that ravaged the area last year.

There were no reports of deaths or damage, and Vicente Nunez, head of the National Emergency Office, said no tsunami alert was issued after the quake on Sunday.

"There has been no harm to people, no harm to property," Nunez said.

"We will continue monitoring."

The Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre in Hawaii also said a destructive Pacific Ocean-wide tsunami was not expected.

President Sebastian Pinera urged calm in an address to the nation.

"There was an exercise of self-evacuation, which is exactly what we have asked people to do," Pinera said.

"Fortunately we do not have to lament accidents or losses of life."

Some mobile phone communications and electrical power were knocked out in the Araucania region where the quake was centred, about 600 kilometres southwest of the capital, Santiago.

The US Geological Survey (USGS) said the quake struck at 2020 GMT Sunday (0720 AEDT Monday), 70 kilometres northwest of the provincial capital of Temuco, at a depth of 16 kilometres.

The National Emergency Office said the quake was "medium intensity" and struck Biobio, Maule and O'Higgins, a region in south-central Chile that was devastated by an 8.8 magnitude quake and tsunami in February 2010.

Nunez told reporters that, on the basis of initial reports, the quake "did not cause damage or victims," although there were power outages and interruptions in telephone service.

"It's common in these types of situations for telephone services to collapse and for there to be power outages," he said.

There was at least one aftershock of 5.0 magnitude, the USGS said.

When the first temblor struck, people in several coastal cities quickly moved away from the ocean, abandoning some shopping centres entirely.

In the communities of La Araucania, Puerto Saavedra, Tolten and Teodoro Smith, an estimated 50,000 people voluntarily evacuated to higher ground, according to Nunez.

Hundreds of tourists spending the New Year's holiday at the resorts of Villarica and Pucon cut their trips short and headed north, clogging roads and toll stations.

Residents of the region have fresh memories of the magnitude-8.8 quake and resulting tsunami on February 27, 2010, that killed at least 520 people and left 200,000 homeless.

Sergio Barrientos, director of the seismology office at the University of Chile, said Sunday's temblor was itself an aftershock of last year's mega-quake.

Chilean Navy's Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service discounted the threat of a tsunami following Sunday's quake, saying the epicentre was on land and not at sea.

An initial report by the USGS said the quake occurred offshore but it later revised its findings.

The earthquake was also felt in Argentina's Patagonia region, near the border with Chile, especially in San Martin de los Andes, where dozens of people ran out of the customs building fearing it might collapse, the Bariloche News Agency said.

No injuries or damage from the quake were reported in Argentina.


