AFP

A powerful 7.3-magnitude earthquake has struck off Vanuatu, triggering a small tsunami exactly six years after giant waves killed 220,000 people around the Indian Ocean.

The Hawaii-based Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said on Sunday the shallow quake generated a tsunami, but it cancelled a regional warning after the wave measured only 15cm higher than normal in Vanuatu.

"Sea level readings confirm that a tsunami was generated," the centre said in its bulletin.

"This tsunami may have been destructive along coastlines of the region near the earthquake epicentre," it said, but cancelled the warning when no destructive wave hit.

The quake struck at 12.16am (1216 AEDT) on Sunday, and the initial tsunami warning covered Vanuatu, Fiji and New Caledonia. There were no reports of damage or casualties.

In the capital, Port Vila, a member of staff at the Melanesian Port Vila Hotel said the hotel was busy with late-night Christmas revellers when the quake struck.

"Some of us, we ran outside and stood and watched the sea for a few minutes but nothing happened. There is no damage and no injuries," Jackie Philip said, adding that no tsunami warning had been given on local radio.

A receptionist at the Grand Hotel called it a "small" earthquake, adding that calls to the meteorological office went unanswered. Staff at the nearby Island Magic Hotel also said there had been no local  warning.

"We haven't had any notification of a tsunami," a worker told AFP. "We definitely felt the earthquake but we are notified if there's actually a tsunami."

The US Geological Survey (USGS) said the quake was 12.3km deep and its epicentre was 145km west of Isangel, on the ni-Vanuatu island of Tanna.

At least a dozen aftershocks of magnitude 5.0 or greater hit the area after the main tremor, according to USGS, including a powerful 6.2-magnitude shock some 12 hours after the initial quake.

Sunday's quake came on the sixth anniversary of one of the worst natural disasters of modern times, when a tsunami triggered by an undersea quake off Indonesia killed more than 220,000 people around the Indian Ocean.

After the disaster, which came with little or no warning for millions of coastal residents, regional governments deployed a string of monitoring buoys in the Indian and Pacific oceans to keep track of any abnormal waves.


