AAP

A line of police is searching for bodies in the fields leading into Grantham in the Lockyer Valley, after an extreme flash flood roared down the range.

A man's body was found in fields on Thursday, and another was found in a Grantham home on Wednesday.

Twelve more locals are missing, Inspector Mark Kelly said.

Many didn't have time to run.

The wall of water that hit the town on Monday ripped the town apart.

It picked up one house and threw it into a melon field. Another home slid two metres off its foundations.

Smashed cars were wedged up against trees, and fridges and freezers were strewn about.

Long swathes of grass wrapped around power poles a metre high have dried horizontally, as if the waters were still flowing.

It's hoped the missing aren't buried in the mess.

"We've grave fears for some people," Insp Kelly said.

"The search is a mammoth task."

One hundred and twenty Australian Defence Force personnel and 90 search and rescue volunteers have descended on the Lockyer Valley to look for life from Spring Bluff to Grantham.

Of the 15 killed in the floods, 12 were from the Toowoomba region including Grantham.

In Grantham, each home in the community of 300-plus has been scoured for survivors, but bodies may be hidden under piles of debris.

Earthmoving equipment was brought in on Thursday.

"We'll carefully drag out debris to make sure there's no deceased person," Insp Kelly said.

There were fears bodies would be found in a number of cars caught under the railway bridge, but police gave the all-clear after checking them on Thursday afternoon.

Lockyer Valley MP Ian Rickus said the Lockyer Creek rose three metres in 20 minutes on Monday.

"That's why we had no chance," he said.

Lockyer Valley Mayor Steve Jones said the search was the most depressing episode for the townspeople.

"It's all a waiting game," Mr Jones said.

Federal Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop and Queensland Opposition Leader John-Paul Langbroek drove into the town on Thursday,

They walked down the deserted streets.

No house had been left untouched. Whole trees poked out of windows and, inside, couches were upside down.

"These are very grim scenes ... it looks like it's been hit by a bomb," Ms Bishop said.

Mr Langbroek said it looked surreal.

"I thought it looked like a scene from Universal Studios, from something like (movies) Earthquake or Volcano," he said.

"To see these houses moved off their stumps, cars on verandahs, just a scene of devastation and destruction."


