BEIJING: The studio stood at the heart of an embryonic arts cluster on the outskirts of Shanghai. It took two years to build - and one day to tear down.

An order to demolish the studio - designed by Ai Weiwei, a protean artist who is one of the most outspoken critics of the Chinese Communist Party - was issued last July after city officials said it had been built without planning permission.

Ai took the move to be retribution for rankling the authorities. He said officials told him the demolition would not take place until after the Chinese New Year, on February 3.

He was shocked to discover that workers had begun knocking it down early on Tuesday, Ai said in a telephone interview from Shanghai. A neighbouring studio he had designed for a friend had also been demolished, he said.

''Everything is gone,'' he said. They finished the job at 9 o'clock [Tuesday] night.''

The officials might have moved ahead with their plans so that the demolition would take place without a spotlight, Ai said.

Shanghai city officials could not be reached for comment.

Ai's studio was to be used as an education centre and a site for artists in residence. He had invited a group of university graduates from Norway to come to the studio next month to study architecture with him.

Ai said he believed his advocacy in two causes might have prompted Shanghai officials to order the demolition.

The first was that of Yang Jia, who killed six policemen in a Shanghai police station in July 2008. Yang, 28, had been arrested and beaten by Shanghai police in October 2007 for riding an unlicensed bicycle. He became a hero among many Chinese, and was executed in November 2008.

The second was the case of Feng Zhenghu, a lawyer and activist who spent more than three months in Tokyo's Narita Airport after Shanghai officials denied him entry when he tried to return to China. Ai made a documentary about his predicament.

Ai has also demanded democracy for China, criticised government corruption for playing a role in the deaths of schoolchildren in the 2008 Sichuan earthquake and supported Liu Xiaobo, a political prisoner who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year.

The New York Times

 


