TWITTER has been involved in several of the biggest - and silliest - news stories of the year, both in the ''celebrisphere'' and in the real world. The earliest reports and photos of the devastating Haitian quake came via Twitter, while events such as the FIFA World Cup represented the largest period of sustained activity for an event in Twitter's short history. In all, an astonishing 25 billion tweets were sent this year, according to Twitter.

January 13: ''dead bodies are everywhere i havent seen one ambulance or any proffesional [sic] med care anywhere in port-au-prince.'' Frederic Dupoux, freelance photographer in Port-au-Prince in the hours following the 7.0-magnitude earthquake in which upwards of 230,000 people died.

January 22: ''Hello Twitterverse! We r now LIVE tweeting from the International Space Station the 1st live tweet from Space! :) More soon, send your ?'' NASA astronaut T.J. Creamer, with the first tweet from space

February 4: ''This tweet sent from an iPad. Does it look cool?'' Wall Street Journal executive Alan Murray on the new, must-have technology of 2010.

May 23: ''Catastrophe is a strong word, let's all agree to call it a whoopsie daisy.'' @BPGlobalPR, a fake Twitter account's take on the Deepwater Horizon explosion in the Gulf of Mexico which caused one of the worst oil spills in history. According to Twitter, ''Gulf Oil Spill'' was the No. 1 trend on Twitter in 2010.

June 9: ''@Snooki u r right, I would never tax your tanning bed! Pres Obama's tax/spend policy is quite The Situation! but I do rec wearing sunscreen!'' Republican Senator John McCain, after Nicole ''Snooki'' Polizzi of Jersey Shore complains about an Obama plan to tax tanning salons, candidate McCain sympathises. Snooki's memorable response: ''Haha Yes!!''

June 21: ''Rolling Stone quotes Gen McChrystal says Amb (ret Gen) Eikenberry 'betrayed' him with leaked memo last yr doubting Karzai story is out fri.'' Andrea Mitchell, NBC chief foreign affairs correspondent, whose tweet leads reporters to Rolling Stone's incendiary article about General Stanley McChrystal, chief commander of US and NATO forces in Afghanistan. He is relieved of his command two days later.

June 23: ''The White House Welcome to @twitter President Medvedev! RT@KremlinRussia-E: Hello everyone! I'm on Twitter, and this is my first tweet.'' @whitehouse and President Barack Obama respond: ''Red phones no longer required.''

July 18: ''Ground Zero Mosque supporters: doesn't it stab you in the heart, as it does ours throughout the heartland? Peaceful Muslims, pls refudiate''. Sarah Palin, when told there's no such word as refudiate, tries again using refute, then comes out swinging: '''Refudiate,' 'misunderestimate,' 'wee-wee'd up.' English is a living language. Shakespeare liked to coin new words too. Got to celebrate it!''

September 14: ''Gay Veterans were my VMA dates. Repeal Don't Ask Don't Tell. CALL HARRY REID to Schedule Senate Vote.'' Lady Gaga

September 17: ''Regrettably, I did in fact fail my most recent drug test and if I am asked, I am prepared to appear before Judge Fox next week as a result.'' Lindsay Lohan, actor and wild child.

October 24: ''WE DID!'' Singer Katy Perry and actor Russell Brand announce their marriage.

November 9: ''I can't be everybody's hero and villain savior and sinner Christian and anti Christ!'' Rapper Kanye West, serial tweeter

November 16: ''The Prince of Wales is delighted to announce the engagement of Prince William to Miss Catherine Middleton.'' @Clarence House, with the most romantic tweet of the year, from the official royal Twitter account.

December 1: ''WikiLeaks servers at Amazon ousted. Free speech the land of the free fine our $ are now spent to employ people in Europe.'' @WikiLeaks As Amazon and other suppliers cut ties with WikiLeaks, the website sends blow-by-blow tweets.

Philadelphia Inquirer, twitter.com


