Southern Sudanese want to build a prosperous nation but the vote on secession could bring back bloodshed, writes Jason Koutsoukis.

IN JUST over three weeks the people of Southern Sudan will vote in a referendum that is expected to partition the country and deliver the world its newest nation.

''To be sitting here today, watching my people on the brink of an independence that almost every man, woman and child has fought for, is for me earth-shattering,'' says Barri Wanji, 74, a former guerilla.

But the historic ballot could signal more than the break-up of Africa's largest nation.

With the northern government in Khartoum unhappy at the prospect of losing the untapped wealth beneath the soil of Southern Sudan, there are fears a vote for partition could signal a return to bloodshed.

''The prospect of a return to war is very distressing, but also very real,'' says Cirino Hiteng Ofuho, an adviser to the President of the government of Southern Sudan, Salva Kiir Mayardit. ''We are planning for every possible contingency.

''The flashpoint will not be the loss of territory, or the loss of resources. The biggest danger is the anger that follows the loss of pride for the north when the south formally breaks away.''

Three days after Ofuho spoke to the Herald, there were reports that Russian-made fighter jets and Antonov bombers had attacked several targets on the future border between north and south.

While no one was killed, the attacks prompted thousands to flee, upsetting a voter registration campaign in Southern Sudan.

Amid vigorous denials by Khartoum that it was responsible for the attacks, the United Nations confirmed the air raids had taken place.

''After verification it was established by the [joint ceasefire commission] members that air attacks took place in the vicinity of Timsaha, in western Bahr al-Ghazal, and no casualties have been reported,'' said a UN spokesman, Kouider Zerrouk.

Given that only Khartoum's army has an air force, no other military force is likely to have been responsible for the raids.

''I remain in grave doubt that Khartoum will actually allow the vote to occur, and secession to take place,'' Ambrose Ring Thiik says.

Thiik, the first chief justice of the Supreme Court of South Sudan, who retired in 2007, says people only have to look at the past actions of the Khartoum government to understand the strength of opposition. ''Khartoum is possessed of a fundamental unwillingness to accept Southern Sudanese sovereignty. Their wish is for southern Sudan to fail.''

Despite the semblance of unity when it became the first sub-Saharan state to win independence in 1956, Sudan has spent most of its years of independence at war with itself. ''Sudan has always been two countries disguised as one,'' Thiik says.

In a country divided along ethnic and cultural lines, the conflict has centred on attempts by the Arab north to impose Islam on the predominantly African Christian south.

As southern resistance grew stronger, the conflict grew bloodier.

By the time a peace agreement between north and south was signed in 2005, the war had claimed an estimated 2.5 million lives, making it one of the deadliest conflicts of the 20th century.

''It is difficult to imagine the brutality the people of this country have seen,'' Barri Wanji says.

Wanji, after studying economics in the 1960s, joined the staff at the University of Khartoum. A Dinka, the largest ethnic group in Southern Sudan, Wanji says the discrimination he faced on campus turned him into a rebel soldier in 1966.

Serving briefly as minister of defence and foreign minister in a rebel southern government established in the early 1970s, Wanji was later a founding member of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, which eventually prevailed over the north and whose political wing, the Sudan People's Liberation Movement, now controls the government of southern Sudan.

''The seven regimes that have ruled this country from Khartoum have had one thing in common - to repress, enslave and suffocate the people of the south,'' Wanji says.

Still in the liberation army, Wanji is now a member of the Southern Sudanese legislative assembly.

He believes the vote will be an expression of democracy in its purest form. ''There is no tribe, clan or family that has not been touched by the violence. But it was our will to survive and to preserve our freedom that won.''

A vast wilderness roughly the size of France, Southern Sudan is part desert, part swamp, part rain-soaked jungle. It has high rates of infant mortality and an average life expectancy of about 53 years. Malaria and other mosquito-borne diseases remain the biggest challenge for healthcare workers, who are also struggling to contain HIV, kala azar, malnutrition and water-borne diseases such as diarrhoea, typhoid and hepatitis.

''No one underestimates the problems we face in Southern Sudan,'' says Barnaba Marial Benjamin, the government of South Sudan's good-humoured Minister for Information.

''This is what happens after five decades of neglect by Khartoum, after so many years of repression and refusal to invest in basic infrastructure.

''But I can guarantee you one thing: Southern Sudan is not going to be a failed state.

''What we have seen happen in west and central Africa will not happen here. We are a healthy and secure society with a unique commitment to build the strongest nation in all Africa.''

To be sure, in the southern capital of Juba there is the something of the sense of an economic boom waiting to happen. Despite its lack of paved roads, seemingly incurable electricity shortages, and a city water main, Juba still buzzes with excitement.

Its tiny airport is now host to an average of 80 flights a day. Diplomats, aid workers and representatives of the more than 7000 foreign companies that have registered to do business in Southern Sudan are filling Juba's eccentric collection of bars and restaurant compounds.

Shiny new four-wheel-drives jam Juba's streets, often being driven by former refugees from the conflict who have returned to help rebuild the country of their birth - men such as William Agar Anyar, who made the long journey from child refugee, to teenage soldier in the Southern People's Liberation Army and finally to Australian citizen.

With a wife and two children living in Blacktown, Anyar, who is uncertain of his age but believes he was born sometime in 1972, made the decision to return to Juba for the three months before the referendum.

From a table at Da Vinci's, the swank hotel and restaurant on the west bank of the White Nile, Anyar points to two hills on the eastern horizon, and says that in 1992 he was engaged there in one of the fiercest battles of the entire civil war.

''From the fifth of May to the fifth of June I fought there,'' he says.

''I had no idea how old I was; the important thing was that I was old enough to carry a gun. But what I started then when I began to fight, I mean to finish now.

''It's up to people like me, who have been able to earn money and learn so many things in a country like Australia, to come make sure that not only does the referendum succeed, but that the new country of south Sudan succeeds also.''

Another Australian citizen who has returned to Southern Sudan is Gatwech Lam Puoch, 50, a father of seven and now a member of the government of South Sudan legislative assembly.

''I was subject to harassment, intimidation, unlawful arrest, torture - as the northern-led government carried out a holy war against the south and tried to impose a national Islamic government that adhered to the principles of sharia law,'' he says.

''In the end they failed but before that I was lucky enough to be able to leave the country and make a new life in Australia. Now I am back to help protect the rights and freedoms we fought so hard for.''

Like many Southern Sudanese, Puoch is feeling certain that the question of separation will win approval from an overwhelming majority of the 3 million people who registered to vote in the referendum, on January 9.

Nevertheless, Puoch remains cautious about the chances of a long-lasting peace.

''The fighting can erupt again at any time,'' he says.

''No one really believes that the north is serious about allowing South Sudan to secede without provoking some sort of a fight.''

Perhaps in no area of Sudan is the sense of apprehension greater than in the resource-rich Abyei province, on the southern side of the border between north and south.

Abyei is still scarred by the clashes in 2008 in which the main township of about 50,000 people was virtually razed. Some liken it to a pool of petrol waiting for a match to ignite it.

Abyei is split by tensions between the province's majority African Dinka and its minority Arab Misseriyan population, and it has not been decided when the province will be allowed to take part in the referendum.

Under the conditions of the Co-operative Peace Agreement between north and south, the people of Abyei will have their say in a separate referendum to the rest of southern Sudan.

The US special envoy to Sudan, Scott Gration, was reported this week saying that it appeared certain that due to problems surrounding voter eligibility, the referendum in Abyei would not go ahead on January 9.

The main concern is that if the south votes to secede, both north and south will move to claim ownership of Abyei province. If violence broke out in Abyei, it could derail the outcome of the referendum for the rest of southern Sudan. ''We are working with both sides to calm the rhetoric and put a plan in place that will give both sides reassurances,'' Gration said.

''This is probably not a situation where either side will be happy. We're looking for a solution that leaves both sides angry but neither side mad.''

In an interview with the Herald, the acting governor of Abyei, Kon Manyiet Matiok, warned that if the Dinka of Abyei, who form a clear majority of the province's population, were prevented from joining a new South Sudan, there would be violence.

''The issues surrounding the vote, and the Misseriya are a deliberate provocation from Khartoum,'' Matiok declares.

''We will not be stopped from voting. If we are, then the only alternative is the use of force.''

But, in the eyes of Barnaba Marial Benjamin, any talk of bloodshed is overblown.

''Neither side has any interest in returning to war,'' he says. ''Both sides are exhausted after decades of civil war, and no one wants to return to that.

''We in the south also recognise that we cannot have an economically strong south without an economically strong north. We need each other to survive, and the government of southern Sudan will be doing everything it can to ensure that the north participates in any future economic development of southern Sudan.''

Rabie Abdulati Obeid, a spokesman for the north's ruling National Congress Party, also dismisses suggestions that the north is preparing for an oil war with the south, saying that when it comes to oil, the two sides need each other.

''The south may produce 500,000 barrels of oil per day but it needs the infrastructure of the north to export it,'' Obeid says.

''In circumstances like this, no one is preparing to go to war.''

Whether or not the north keeps its promises to abide by the result from the referendum, it seems that nothing will prevent the people of southern Sudan from keeping their date with history on January 9.

''We have waited 55 years for independence,'' says Thiik. ''The momentum now is unstoppable.''


