WASHINGTON:  This was supposed to be the week of another ''showdown'' in the US Congress. Now, the very word makes politicians squeamish.

The shootings in Tucson, Arizona, on Saturday that killed six and left the Democratic congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords and 13 others wounded resounded in Washington with a deep and immediate impact.

As with other shocking, collective national moments, the attack prompted a dramatic - if temporary - stand-down in the partisan battles that have consumed the Capitol.

Instead of a vote to repeal Barack Obama's healthcare act, Republicans leaders in the House of Representatives scheduled prayers and security briefings.

The President's advisers were weighing the possibility of a national address as well as calling for a national moment of silence.

On political talk shows on Sunday, politicians from both sides stressed their friendships and mutual respect. One House member even suggested more hugs and less name-calling.

It is prime time for groups such as Third Way, of which Ms Giffords is an honorary co-chairman, and No Labels, which call for Republicans and Democrats to back off from their partisan impulses and angry tone.

''Politics has become too personal, too nasty and perhaps too dangerous,'' the president of  Third Way, Jonathan Cowan, said.

''We are heartened by the outpouring of concern and respect from all corners of the political world. Perhaps out of this senseless act some sense can return to our public discourse.''

The scolding came from outside Washington as well. Clarence Dupnik, the sheriff of Pima County, Arizona, who is leading the investigation into the shootings, was being applauded for condemning ''all this vitriol'' in the nation's political discourse.

''This may be free speech, but it's not without consequences,'' he said at a press briefing.

There is no evidence yet that the suspect in Saturday's shootings was influenced by inflammatory political rhetoric, but the attack has prompted soul-searching among some, and a belief from legislative leaders that unified actions rather than divisive votes should mark their public response.

''This is a time for the House to lock arms, both in condemnation of this heinous act, and in prayer for those killed and wounded in this attack,'' the Republican House Speaker, John Boehner, said in a conference call joined by 800 members of Congress, their spouses and staff.

''At a time when an individual has shown us humanity at its worst, we must rise to the occasion for our nation and show Congress at its best.''

The House Democratic whip, Steny Hoyer, said on CBS's Face the Nation that the shootings, whatever their motivation, would cause politicians to examine their rhetoric more closely.

''I don't think there's any doubt but my colleagues are very concerned about the environment in which they are now operating,'' Mr Hoyer said. ''It's been a much angrier, confrontational environment over the last two or three years than we have experienced in the past. I think there is worry about that.''

In large part, the discussion on Sunday tried to skirt both partisan blame and effects of political rhetoric in favour of a cooling of the talk. On NBC's Meet the Press both Democrats and Republicans pledged civility.

''I feel like that we need to realise as, as members of Congress, as Americans, that true tolerance is not pretending you have no differences,'' said Trent Franks, a Republican. ''It's being kind and decent to each other in spite of those differences.''

Emanuel Cleaver, a Democrat, said: ''What has happened to the debate is one person or one side - Republicans or Democrats, it doesn't matter - they say, 'I'm right and you're evil'. ''And that is what's damaging this country.''

Mr Franks and Mr Cleaver said Ms Giffords was not a practitioner of such politics.

''We have 435 members of Congress,'' Mr Cleaver said. ''If you rank them in terms of volatility, Gabby is probably in the last one-half of 1 per cent.''

The Washington Post


