THE NSW Health Department is to overhaul the treatment of dying patients in public hospitals, as it grapples with mounting concern that frail elderly people sometimes receive excessive and futile therapy.

A wide-ranging review would produce a single policy governing the treatment of dying people, bringing together disparate advice on resuscitation, palliative care and the withdrawal of treatment, said its co-chairman, Greg Stewart.

A legal ruling last year, confirming for the first time in NSW the right of patients to refuse life-saving treatment via the use of advance care directives or living wills, has increased the urgency of the review, which is expected to report in June.

Dr Stewart, who is also director of population health in the south-western Sydney area and chairman of NSW Health's Clinical Ethics Advisory Panel, said in some regions individual doctors championed the autonomy of dying patients and raised colleagues' awareness of the right to opt out of invasive, time-consuming or painful treatment, but there was variation in the degree to which people's wishes were respected.

The initiative would extend beyond hospitals to include the aged care sector and the state public guardian, Dr Stewart said.

''It's about, when the end comes, supporting the dying process'' through clearer guidance on withdrawing or withholding treatment, he said.

People with long-term diseases such as cancer, heart disease or dementia ''sometimes end up in hospital and there's never been any discussion around what it all means''.

But Dr Stewart said raising the prospect of death earlier could conflict with the aims of intensive treatment.

''Obviously the reason you set up a healthcare system is to make people better.''

A state policy could be finalised by the middle of next year, with the forthcoming local hospital networks then required to say how they will implement it in their regions.

Peter Saul, a senior intensive care specialist at John Hunter Hospital and the director of the clinical unit in ethics and health law at the University of Newcastle, said doctors and administrators had been forced to focus on the rights of dying patients by a Supreme Court decision last year.

Justice Robert McDougall ruled a Jehovah's Witness's written refusal of a blood transfusion had to be honoured even after he became unconscious, and that any advance care directive must be respected if it was ''made by a capable adult, and clear and unambiguous''.

Dr Saul said doctors would now be on "unsafe ground if they completely ignored [a directive], leaving themselves open to a charge [they] assaulted the patient''.

It was unclear how many people might have advance care directives, he said, which were not centrally registered but held instead by the patient or their family.

Dr Saul said if such plans were entered into a database, doctors would risk acting on outdated instructions. He suggested a compromise of ''an elective flag that [a directive] exists'', allowing doctors to request it from a patient's representative.

A Melbourne study this year found that among elderly hospital patients, 86 per cent of those given the opportunity to prepare an advance care directive had their wishes known and respected when they died, compared with only 30 per cent of those who did not receive formal planning advice.

Later, family members were also less likely to suffer anxiety or depression if their loved one's wishes had been documented.

 


