The price regulator is withdrawing. Will competition suffice, asks Brian Robins?

WHEN it comes to the sale of state-owned power assets, Victoria has led the way. The Kennett government sold its electricity assets for an estimated $22 billion in the 1990s to stave off financial collapse - now the state has no control over electricity prices.

NSW is following its southern rival down the same path, with the state government relinquishing any control over electricity prices over the next few years. As well as grappling with increasingly complex mobile phone and broadband deals, consumers will be hit with more aggressive marketing deals for electricity and gas.

The NSW government's decision to bale out of the electricity retailing business will eventually leave all households to decide for themselves which electricity retailer to sign with. It is the beginning of the end for IPART, the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal, which protected consumers by staring down the demands of electricity retailers for unreasonable price rises.

In its place is the Australian Energy Regulator, an arm of the federal competition watchdog, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, which appears to have a less rigorous approach to restraining price rises than those controlling the ''regulated'' monopoly assets - the poles and wire electricity distribution.

As a result of federal government policy, the state government is to quit any remaining controls over the electricity market, which will leave households at the mercy of private operators. IPART has set power prices for households until at least June 2013; after that the hope is that enough competitors will have entered the market to keep power prices as low as possible.

The key caveat is that there is sufficient ''competition''. The Australian Energy Market Commission is to review the level of competition in the NSW retail energy market early next year as a precursor to the state government withdrawing from price controls.

Private companies have been able to market electricity in NSW for several years. But the dominance of the three government-controlled retailers, EnergyAustralia, Integral Energy and Country Energy, coupled with low regulated electricity prices, limited them to less than a third of the market.

Following yesterday's sales, the private sector is now in full control.

''We generally believe that competitive markets deliver the better outcomes than controlled markets,'' Christopher Zinn of Choice said. ''But electricity is different.

''Victoria is the most deregulated, yet its electricity price is rising as well, for much the same reasons as in NSW - new investments on transmission and on green energy.

''Any benefit of keeping a lid on prices will be offset by increased spending on transmission and for green electricity. Therefore competitive benefits may be overshadowed by price increases under way and in the pipeline.''

The complexity of competing price offers have dissuaded many households from considering proposals from new retailers. Others regret having done so, caught up in last year's collapse of the retailers Jackgreen or EnergyOne.

But consumer reluctance to change supplier does not mean they do not care about their electricity bill or supplier.

''It is incorrect to say there is consumer apathy about electricity: consumers are very concerned about their bills but there is an element of passivity, and lack of energy in pursuing supplier alternatives,'' Louis Schetzer, the senior policy officer at the Public Interest Advocacy Centre, says.

Zinn, from Choice, says: ''It's a hot issue, and will get more so. The key is to make [rates] as comparable as possible, and less complex, so people can make the best choice to suit them.''

Also, household use of electricity differs markedly across the state, and even in rural areas.

''Bourke and Lismore differ from Cooma and Wagga Wagga'' in their electricity usage, Schetzer says. ''NSW is not a single market: there are different regional variances in need and usage.''

In a recent review of the ACT market, for example, the Australian Energy Market Commission found it is not a competitive market, in an assessment that could be replicated in many parts of NSW.

Clarifying those differences is basic to deciding whether there is sufficient competition in the market, so the government can step back from controlling power prices.

The government's sale will leave three firms dominating the NSW energy market: Origin, TruEnergy and AGL. That is similar to the limited number of big banks in the state - Commonwealth, Westpac, NAB and ANZ - and just the two supermarket chains - Woolworths and Coles - which dominate their markets.

The sale of the three retailers has resulted in the Keneally government abandoning its earlier proposal of selling assets on the sharemarket, to create a ''new force'' in the market. As part of the sale, the government insisted from the outset it would seek new market players - either companies from overseas or, failing that, bundling together some of the power generation and retail assets and floating it on the sharemarket next year.

That competitive policy has been achieved partly with the emergence of the Hong Kong-backed TruEnergy as a significant force in the NSW market. It has bought EnergyAustralia, the largest electricity retailer.

But the sharemarket float was not an option, politically, for the government.

With the ALP widely expected to lose the March state election, the final decision on any sharemarket float would have been made by an incoming Coalition government, led by Barry O'Farrell. He baulked at backing the former premier Morris Iemma's planned power privatisation and instead favoured taking a ''political scalp'' by forcing Iemma out of office.

The Carr and the Iemma governments wanted to sell the industry's retail and generation assets, while keeping control of power distribution - the poles and wires. After Iemma's failure in 2008, the former premier Nathan Rees put forward a more limited proposal to sell the retailers and output from the generators, but keep the power generators, poles and wires in government control.

The prolonged sale process has taken place against the backdrop of debate in Canberra over putting a price on carbon emissions, which will push up electricity prices sharply and at the same time prevent many potential bidders from stepping forward.

As a result, the $15 billion and more initially anticipated from the sale is now expected to realise a final amount closer to $7 billion. As the former NSW Treasury secretary John Pierce told a parliamentary inquiry in 2008, the sale model put forward by Rees was the ''next best model'', even though it was a proposal his department had rejected when it was put forward earlier in the decade.

A key part in the lower sale price received has been the debate over a carbon price. Even though a price has yet to be fixed, power prices in NSW are rising smartly, and are primed to rise much further, irrespective of a price on carbon.

Under rises agreed to by IPART, household prices jumped by up to 13 per cent on July 1, and the cumulative rises for the three years to mid-2013 total up to 42 per cent. And looking at the price that investors in financial markets are willing to pay for electricity delivered in the future, electricity prices are expected to continue rising. In electricity futures trading the wholesale price is about $50 a megawatt, up from the present wholesale price of about $38.

The approved increase in power prices midyear has prompted more companies to begin marketing electricity in NSW, with both Origin and AGL especially aggressive in ''buying'' market share. The level of ''churn'' in the electricity sector in NSW - those households changing electricity supplier - has started to rise (to about 14 per cent) and is expected to surge following the asset sales.

Yesterday's purchase will give Origin the biggest share of the power market in NSW, along with a 33 per cent share nationally, creating concerns for some.

The opposition's Treasury spokesman, Mike Baird, said giving two companies such a dominant position in the NSW power market meant the state government had failed in its stated objective of increasing retail competition.

''The government has entrenched a structure where two parties dominate the market,'' Baird says.

AS MANY as one in three households are eligible for assistance to pay their electricity bills. The state government has allowed for $800 million in assistance over five years from July last year, putting increased pressure on its finances. The energy concessions budget for 2010-11 alone is more than $170 million.

Welfare agencies are struggling to keep up with demand from vulnerable people, with the government recently reviewing the Energy Accounts Payment Assistance Scheme because it is stretched. The scheme provides up to eight vouchers, worth $30 each, to financially exposed households to help pay electricity bills. But financial pressures are such that some agencies have been hoarding vouchers, with some families seeking repeat assistance.

The government recently lifted the energy rebate to $145 a year from $112, with eligibility expanded to include all healthcare card holders in addition to pensioner concessions and certain Veterans' Affairs card holders. Another increase to $161 is planned.

Brian Robins

 


