AAP

Australians are subjected to an "apartheid" health care system where the mentally ill are treated poorly compared with patients with physical illnesses, says an acclaimed mental health expert.

The 2010 Australian of the Year, Professor Patrick McGorry, made the bold comparison at Queensland's first community mental health summit on Wednesday.

Prof McGorry said the under-resourcing of mental health care played a big part in the divide between the accessibility and quality of mental and physical health care.

He gave the example of a Perth woman who had two different experiences as a breast cancer patient and mental health patient.

"She found a small breast lump and went to her doctor ... the doors just swung open to fast-track her treatment," Prof McGorry said.

"She ended up having a simple operation, woke up in a hospital bed with a room full of flowers, chocolates and friends and family. Huge support and she made a very good recovery."

He said six months later she had a recurrence of a psychotic illness.

"She had tremendous difficulty fighting her way through the triage system to get access to care," he said.

"When she did get access to care it was in much more sobering surroundings in an inpatient unit.

"It was highly stressful with stressed-out nursing staff, not many chocolates or flowers, and certainly fewer friends and family.

"It's the same woman, in the same healthcare system, in the same city, in one of the richest countries in the world.

"That's what I mean about apartheid. Two different types of care in the same health system."

He said the nation needed at least to double mental health funding to $10 billion a year in the next 10 years to help bridge the gap.

Prof McGorry is one of the founding board members of the federal government's national youth mental health foundation, Headspace.

He said Headspace centres were at the forefront of 21st century mental health care, providing a friendly and attractive one-stop shop for young mentally ill people seeking support.

The federal government plans to double the country's 30 centres over the next two or three years.

Prof McGorry said about 300 were needed over the next five to 10 years and he would like to see them work alongside other initiatives, including the Queensland government's Time Out houses, which provide early mental health intervention for people aged 18 to 25.

* Readers seeking support and information about mental illness can contact Lifeline on 13 11 14 or MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78


