AAP

Prime Minister Julia Gillard says Labor stands for something "very different" to the Greens, especially in the area of economic policy.

Labor entered into an agreement with the Australian Greens and independents after the August 21 election to form minority government.

The coalition has accused Labor of being dictated to by the Greens, with Opposition Leader Tony Abbott this week in parliament lambasting the Gillard government for its "Green lean".

But Ms Gillard told ABC Radio on Thursday there were clear differences between Labor and the Greens.

"Labor does stand for something very different to the Greens. We stand on our political heritage, our reforming heritage," she said.

She cited reform of the healthcare system and economic restructuring, such as the floating of the dollar and dropping tariffs, as part of that heritage.

"The Greens are always going to say things different to us. They come off a different set of beliefs and they haven't got the full economic view that we have of this country," she said.

Some members of the Labor caucus, including the left faction, are agitating for the party to back gay marriage, for which the Greens next year plan to seek parliamentary approval.

But, Ms Gillard said, she stood by her view that marriage should be between a man and a woman, describing that as "a foundation stone of our heritage as an Australian society".

Mr Abbott on Thursday told reporters that at the end of tumultuous year in politics, and three years of Labor in power, there was still no evidence the ALP had achieved anything or had any direction.

"This really is a bad government getting worse," he said.

Ms Gillard, who met with her Labor colleagues for a strategic caucus meeting in Canberra on Wednesday night, said it was clear what the party stood for.

"I believe in a fair society ... I believe in strengthening the economy ... words have meaning, they relate to thingsI am delivering for working families," she said.

At a business dinner in Canberra on Wednesday night, the prime minister was given a symbolic pair of shoes representing the walk down the reform road.

The shoes were inscribed with "walk the reform road every day".

"(Reform) requires taking a step every day," Ms Gillard said.

"You don't deliver huge reforms like the NBN (national broadband network) overnight."

Mr Abbott described a five-point list of aims the prime minister presented to her caucus colleagues as a "prime ministerial bucket list" before she faced the "inevitable caucus executioners".


