LOS ANGELES: An adult film performer who tested HIV-positive has called for mandatory condom use in pornography productions, improved testing for sexually transmitted disease and follow-up care for performers.

Speaking publicly for the first time since his test sent a wave of fear over California's adult film industry, he warned of the risks of working in it.

Derrick Burts, 24, said that in the months before he tested positive for HIV, he had also contracted chlamydia, gonorrhea and herpes. ''It's very dangerous,'' he said of the work. ''It should be required that you wear a condom on the set.''

He also criticised an industry-affiliated clinic that conducts HIV tests on performers, saying it failed to refer him to follow-up care. The clinic released a statement last month saying Burts - then identified as ''Patient Zeta'' - had ''acquired the virus through private personal activity''.

''That's completely false,'' Burts said on Tuesday. ''There is no possible way. The only person I had sex with in my personal life was my girlfriend.''

Burts said he tested HIV-positive in October at the Adult Industry Medical Healthcare Foundation after working in both gay and straight porn films for a few months.

Regular tests are required by producers of straight porn who use a clinic database, known as AIM, to clear actors for work.

Burts said he was tested on October 8, then received a panicked call from clinic staff the next afternoon summoning him to the office. Once there, he said, clinic staff told him he had tested HIV-positive.

Burts said he gave clinic staff the names of about a dozen performers he had worked with in recent weeks in both gay and straight productions so they could be placed on a quarantine list and tested. The list included his girlfriend, who also works in the industry as a performer.

The clinic has since said none of the performers tested positive. Burts said his girlfriend tested negative.

He said that when he returned to the clinic on October 23 to review second test results staff told him they had traced his HIV infection to someone he had performed a scene with whom they described as a ''known positive''.

While straight porn performers must show negative HIV test results before filming, the gay porn industry does not have the same restrictions, although condom use is typically required.

Burts said he believed he may have become infected during a gay porn shoot. Like many gay porn films, he said the performers used condoms during intercourse, but not during oral sex.

Burts, a hotel management graduate who worked as a manager and cruise ship magician, became a porn performer for the money - $US200 to $US800 for a straight scene, $US1000 to $US2000 for a gay scene.

He said he wished he had known more about the risks of contracting sexually transmitted diseases in the industry. ''Making $10,000 or $15,000 for porn isn't worth your life,'' he said.

Lawyers representing the clinic have disputed his claims, alleging he was being manipulated by the AIDS Healthcare Foundation, which has campaigned for condom use in porn films. "Any statements made by Patient Zeta which portray AIM as not providing appropriate and proper services are not truthful and are self-serving," they said.

Los Angeles Times

 


