WASHINGTON: Republican hopes of repealing President Barack Obama's signature healthcare reform have received a morale boost after a Virginia judge ruled a central plank of the overhaul unconstitutional.

The decision - the first of three lower-level court challenges to succeed - guarantees that the constitutionality of the $US940 billion legislation will almost certainly be decided by the Supreme Court.

That outcome may take many months and come only after appeal courts have considered the matter.

But for now, Judge Henry Hudson, sitting in Richmond, Virginia, ruled that the government could not legally force people to buy health insurance, a central part of the reforms that are geared to extend coverage to an additional 30 million-plus Americans. Under ''Obamacare'', individuals who can afford to buy insurance must do so or face being fined.

Siding with Virginia's Republican attorney-general, Ken Cuccinelli, the judge said the requirement was not covered by a clause within the constitution that gives Congress the authority to regulate interstate commerce.

"An individual's personal decision to purchase - or decline to purchase - health insurance from a private provider is beyond the historical reach of the commerce clause," he ruled. The mandate was "neither within the letter nor the spirit of the constitution".

But Judge Hudson denied Virginia's request to throw out the law in its entirety or block it from being implemented while his ruling is appealed by the Obama administration.

Republicans wrested control of the House of Representatives - and picked up seats in the Senate - in last month's US midterm elections, strengthening their hand in attempts to repeal or reshape the legislation.

The incoming Speaker of the House, Ohio Republican John Boehner, welcomed the ruling, warning US states not to invest time and effort implementing the healthcare legislation "now that its central mandate has been ruled unconstitutional".

"Republicans have made a pledge to America to repeal this job-killing healthcare law, and that is what we're going to do," Mr Boehner said.

Yet Mr Obama has said he would veto any repeal.

The legal twist came as the White House trumpeted a resolution on an equally vexed front, with the Senate poised to support his compromise package that extends George W. Bush-era personal income tax cuts beyond this month for two years.

For final approval the bill will go to the House of Representatives, where Democrats still hold a majority, but where some liberal members of the party are expected to rail against the move, which extends the cuts to all Americans including the super rich.

Mr Obama had promised to extend the relief only for people earning up to $US200,000 annually ($US250,000 for couples). But he was forced to bargain with Republicans empowered by their election gains.




