AAP

NSW is getting "value" for its health spending, a report shows, though there are pockets of avoidable costs as seen in complications from diabetes and lung disease and the high rate of caesarean births.

A report released on Wednesday by the Bureau of Health Information (BHI) has found NSW ranks alongside the top performing Netherlands and Norway when it comes to the 47 per cent drop in cardiovascular deaths over the past decade.

The state also saw fewer deaths from stroke (down 37 per cent) and colourectal cancer (down 30 per cent), but as the mortality from these illnesses dropped so there was a trend of rising obesity and related chronic disease.

"The report shows NSW does well on the international stage but should seize opportunities to improve healthcare," BHI chief executive Dr Diane Watson said ahead of the report's launch.

"It also shows NSW gets value for its health dollar ... There are some countries that spend much more than NSW and have worse health outcomes."

The research put total public and private health expenditure in NSW in 2007 at $33 billion, or $4,727 per person living in the state.

This compared to $4,249 in the UK and $5,095 in Germany.

The United States topped the chart on per person spending at $10,352 but, in many cases, the US trailed the list of comparison countries in terms of the health outcomes it generated.

Almost 37 Americans needed a diabetes-related lower limb amputation per 100,000 in the population and this compared to just nine in the UK, while NSW came in at 17.7.

Needing repeat hospital trips to treat complications from lung disease was also high in NSW, with 278 cases per 100,000 compared to 104 cases in Switzerland or France and 225 in the US.

Australia was only topped by the US and Switzerland in terms of caesarean sections, which now account for about 30 per cent of live births in NSW every year.

The number of caesarean sections performed annually in NSW surged 55 per cent from 1998 to 2008, the biggest jump detected.

"By addressing things such as high rates of diabetes complications, caesarean rates and numbers of people returning to hospital with avoidable complications, the system could be strengthened," Dr Watson said.

Other key findings in the report include:

- Ten per cent of NSW patients said they had experienced a "medical mistake" in their treatment during the past two years, compared to three per cent in the UK and 11 per cent in Norway.

- Almost six in 10 NSW adults rate their own health as either excellent (21 per cent) or very good (36 per cent).

- Six in 10 NSW people were either overweight or obese (61 per cent).

- NSW people are generally happy with the care they receive from their GP, rating it as excellent (42 per cent) or very good (35 per cent) though more than 60 per cent found it difficult to access after-hours medical care without going to emergency.

- One in three (33 per cent) were treated within 30 minutes of attending a NSW hospital's emergency department while 16 per cent waited more than four hours, putting the state in a better position than Sweden, the UK and Canada.

The Bureau of Health Information is an independent organisation established by the NSW government.

The Healthcare in Focus: How NSW Compares Internationally report can be read online at www.bhi.nsw.gov.au.


