PARIS: Patients who took a weight-loss drug that caused the deaths of hundreds of people have filed a criminal lawsuit against its creator, Servier, in what could prove the biggest French healthcare scandal of the decade.

The medical world is reeling from a government warning that people who took the amphetamine derivative Mediator must immediately see their doctor, because at least 500 people are believed to have died from heart trouble linked to it.

Despite fears about its lethal side effects, Mediator stayed on the market in France for more than 30 years and was banned only last year.

Socialist and Communist politicians are demanding a public inquiry into how it stayed on the market for that long, accusing the government and the health regulatory body of putting lives at risk to protect the profits of big business.

Mediator was recommended to overweight diabetics but also prescribed as an appetite suppressant to healthy women who wanted to lose a few kilograms.

Between its introduction in 1976 and its ban in 2009 it was taken by more than 5 million French people, subsidised by the social security system.

In 1999 a case of severe heart-valve damage in a Marseille patient using the drug was highlighted to authorities, followed by other cases in France.

Spain and Italy banned the drug in 2005 because of health fears. It was never allowed in Australia, Britain or the US.

The French Minister for Health, Xavier Bertrand, sparked panic last week when he announced: ''Our message to all those who took Mediator is that they must see a doctor - particularly those who took it for three months over the past four years.''

The French drug safety body calculated that the drug had caused at least 500 deaths and 3500 hospital admissions.

Irene Frachon, a doctor who published a book warning of the dangers, said Mediator was responsible for a ''health disaster'' in France.

The French Diabetics Association called for patients to come forward, as lawyers prepared criminal suits for negligence and involuntary homicide against Servier, France's second-biggest pharmaceutical company.

Some patients who took the drug described extreme fatigue and breathlessness. Others have undergone open heart surgery to repair damaged valves.

Servier, which created the drug, is based in Nicolas Sarkozy's old fiefdom of Neuilly-sur-Seine, west of Paris, and last year the President appointed its chief executive, Jacques Servier, to the Legion of Honour.

Servier dismissed as ''extrapolation'' the official calculation of deaths linked to Mediator. Mr Servier asked in Le Monde whether the scandal was a fabrication designed to annoy the government.

Another appetite suppressant that Servier sold, Isomeride, was withdrawn in 1997 because of high blood pressure risks.

Guardian News & Media




