TUCSON: Just hours after the shooting of Gabrielle Giffords and others at a neighbourhood meeting in Arizona, about 40 people had gathered in front of her district office, many holding hand-printed signs, others with hands raised towards the traffic, fingers making peace signs.

Motorists sounded car horns in support. Ilene Thompson stood amid the signs that said things like ''Hate Speech = Murder'', banging a drum. Like many of those in the crowd on the corner, she was a volunteer worker in the last Giffords campaign. ''This is just my small way of saying we need a heads-up about the real consequences of hate,'' Ms Thompson said.

Miss Giffords's shooting set off what is likely to be a wrenching debate over anger and violence in American politics.

While the exact motivations of the suspect in the shootings remained unclear, an internet site tied to the man, Jared Lee Loughner, contained anti-government ramblings. And regardless of what led to the episode, it quickly focused attention on the degree to which inflammatory language, threats and implicit instigations to violence have become a steady undercurrent in the nation's political culture.

Within minutes of the first reports that Miss Giffords had been shot, pages began disappearing from the web. One was Sarah Palin's ''crosshairs'' map from last year, which showed a series of contested congressional districts, including Miss Giffords's, with gun targets trained on them. Another was from Daily Kos, the liberal blog, where one of the congresswoman's constituents declared her ''dead to me'' after Miss Giffords voted against Nancy Pelosi in House leadership elections last week.

Clarence Dupnik, the Pima County sheriff, seemed to capture the mood of the day at an evening news conference when he said it was time for the country to ''do a little soul-searching''.

''It's not unusual for all public officials to get threats constantly, myself included,'' Mr Dupnik said. ''That's the sad thing about what's going on in America: pretty soon we're not going to be able to find reasonable, decent people willing to subject themselves to serve in public office.''

Not since the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 has an event generated as much attention as to whether extremism, anti-government sentiment and even simple political passion at both ends of the ideological spectrum have created a climate promoting violence.

The House was set to vote on Wednesday on the new Republican majority's proposal to repeal the healthcare law. But Eric Cantor, the new Majority Leader, said on Saturday the vote and other planned legislative activity will be postponed.

Miss Giffords's office had been vandalised late in March, after the national healthcare bill passed with support from her.

The New York Times

 


