One day in the future, we might look back at the way people with mental illness were treated in the year that has just begun - and we will be ashamed of our failures.

For me, they link up with memories of a much earlier period, 30 years ago when services were even fewer and medications crude.

When he was 17, my elder son, Jonathan, was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia, admitted to hospital, put into striped flannel pyjamas and given so much medication he walked and talked like a zombie. Police vans carted sick people away. Once, Jonathan was left like a dog, tethered and crouching for hours in an open tow-away van in the heat of an Adelaide summer.

Seven years later, Jonathan died of an overdose of cheap wine and sedatives. Did he die from the overdose or from neglect as months and years passed while I tried vainly to get him help? The day before he ended his life, he had wept in my arms, saying he was too sick to go on living. He had abscesses on his feet and in his mouth. His teeth were rotten. He had wasted away. He wanted to die.

Jonathan had struggled with schizophrenia since he was 17. Most people who lived or worked around Kings Cross knew him. They called him Joe. When he wasn't psychotic, Joe was gentle. He was tall and thin, like a reed swaying in a gale. His hair was long, blonde and unkempt. He held his pants up with string, and his feet were bare as he padded across the Harbour Bridge - there and back, there and back - talking to himself and to the demons that plagued his broken mind. Whenever I saw him I would want to weep.

In the years since Jonathan died, more has become known about mental illness. Services have been developed that help keep people in the community rather than hospital. A comprehensive approach was tried, one that was supposed to involve families and consumers. Sometimes it worked, sometimes it didn't.

But in the recent years that I served as a member of the NSW Mental Health Tribunal, I began to feel hopeful that before long, we would have good services for every phase of mental health care and for everyone in need.

It wasn't to be. Gradually, beginning with the prime ministership of John Howard, services have been whittled away and the whittling continues. In Sydney, 24-hour crisis services no longer exist in most areas. Many services now operate in the community from 9 to 5, Monday to Friday. Nothing at night because nights might be unsafe for crisis teams. Nothing at the weekend except at hectic emergency departments. Almost nothing in rural areas.

But what about the person who is ill? And what about their families? If you've ever struggled with a distraught mentally ill person you would know assistance is usually needed desperately. When Jonathan was so ill, I had to rely on the police. Mostly I had to wait hours as I tried to calm my son, who thought I was the devil and wanted to kill me.

And now? In spite of early improvements and the fact that we know what to do, chaos and parsimony reign. Last year, when dollars were being liberally dispensed, mental health was pushed to the back row.

''Wait'' we were told. ''Wait until next year.'' Well, we have waited. And what have we received? A $113 million package of suicide prevention programs. Useful but tokenistic, according to two mental health advisers, Ian Hickie and Pat McGorry.

In the days of Queen Victoria, a robust system of mental healthcare included floggings to beat out the devil. Today, because the devil seems to be too busy fighting wars, we have mental healthcare that appears to rely on endless handouts of ''packages'' - like Smarties, aimed at giving immediate delight but not much more, because every package seems to float on its own.

''Governments have been mired in this for the last 10 or 15 years, just throwing little packages of money for a system that's highly dysfunctional,'' said Professor McGorry, last year's Australian of the Year, in a recent Herald article.

So what am I talking about? Nothing less than the failure of our federal government to provide a functioning comprehensive public mental health system. In NSW mental health bed capacity overflows; emergency departments cannot cope; housing shortages remain acute. Continuing case management in many areas is all but a thing of the past and there is little or no continuity of care. As for the big picture, budgets are depleted as sick people are shunted between health and social services. Jails are filled with people with a mental illness. Strategic planning is totally inadequate. There are no specific goals, no timelines, and standards are falling.

Why does this happen, when governments know what to do but do not do it? Why, when these are not rare illnesses - they affect one in five of our population? The disorganisation and neglect we are asked to accept reflects a callous disregard by the government of some of the most vulnerable and courageous people in our midst.

Mental illness not only saps the initiative and energy of those who are ill, it eats into families, erodes relationships and denies people the chance to live normal lives. There is nothing more lonely than trying to help someone you love when neither of you is getting adequate support.

It is midnight, and my son is pacing a darkened corridor, talking to himself and banging his head against the wall. He is hearing terrible voices saying terrible things. He is fearful. So am I.

Anne Deveson is a journalist, author and documentary filmmaker.

Follow the National Times on Twitter: @NationalTimesAU

* Support is available for anyone who may be distressed by calling Lifeline 131 114, Mensline 1300 789 978, Kids Helpline 1800 551 800


