The tragedy and heroism of 2011 will be remembered for decades, writes David Humphries, but what comes after the flood will define a state and a nation.

IN THE worlds of Judaism and Christianity, of course, there is only the flood, an inundation so intense and comprehensive it would have extinguished life had it not been for the good Noah. That cataclysm aside, however, natural disasters are gauged against more recent comparisons, all the better if they coincide with ''living'' memory.

Tracy's 1974 demolition of Darwin became the yardstick for later cyclones; Ash Wednesday 1983 the measure of the ravages of bushfire. Two years ago, Black Saturday, again in Victoria, displaced the latter and an entirely new benchmark took root in the Australian psyche.

So, too, this week with the flooding of Brisbane. Thirty seven years ago the Queensland capital - albeit a very different Brisbane - was soaked to its bones; the flood of 1974 became the flood. You were there and experienced the loss and misery, or you learnt of it through dissemination of local lore.

In landmarks and conversation, there was no getting away from it. This was an event so devastating that the memory of it could not be allowed to fade. Even newcomers spoke authoritatively on an event that had not wet their toes.

Many Australians forgot the flood, but they were quickly reapprised this week as the nation held its breath, waiting to see whether water levels, the extent of submerged property and the tragic death toll would exceed 1974. As it was, the Brisbane River unexpectedly peaked a metre below the 1974 level and a nation - desperately seeking respite - breathed easier. The owners and occupants of 33,000 flooded properties, including about 25,000 homes (6700 in 1974), were less at ease.

Sixteen people are confirmed dead in the horror stretch from Toowoomba to Brisbane, bringing drownings across the state to 27 since heavy rains began in central Queensland in early December, but grave fears are held for 12 of 51 people unaccounted for.

In Queensland, to be sure, some urban planning and flood mitigation lessons of 1974 had faded - time has a way of inducing complacency - but the memories will fracture quicker now that the great flood of 2011 has secured prime position in the consciousness of Australians in general, Queenslanders more so and Brisbanites in particular.

How empty, then, for the Queensland Roads Minister, Craig Wallace, to chastise the thousands who stood as witness in eerie silence, or barracked and yahooed like football partisans, as the Brisbane River stormed all before it, tossing pontoons, boats, shattered homes, ripped forest, the wherewithal of people's livelihoods and the comforts of family life towards the sea, 23 kilometres from the Brisbane CBD? The debris even included a 1000-tonne remnant of a concrete riverside walkway.

''This is not a tourist attraction,'' said Wallace. ''It's a tragedy. If you are not assisting the effort, please stay at home.'' Fair go, minister. Of course it's tragic, but these aren't rubberneck motorists slowing to a crawl to gawk at damage done to a mangled Ford Falcon, or a crowd gathering to stickybeak at the blood and gore of another's injuries. It is an event Brisbane will talk about for decades. It's the latest chapter in the city's story, a central place in its legend, to be chiselled in stone. Everyone will want their anecdote, their place in the action, even if limited to that of spectator.

They will not need to wait long for bigger roles. In a move reminiscent of Darwin after cyclone Tracy, when hundreds of skilled workers gave freely of their holidays and time without pay to help with Top End emergency restoration, a citizens army of volunteer workers - labourers, truck drivers, tradespeople, anyone who can lend a worthy hand - is being mustered for the clean-up. ''I'm calling on Brisbane residents to put their shoulders to the wheel and get involved in what will be the biggest community clean-up since 1974,'' said the lord mayor, Campbell Newman, whose national profile this week improved almost as much as that of the Premier, Anna Bligh.

And he wasn't a political unknown beforehand. As head of Australia's biggest municipality (Brisbane council has responsibility for almost the entire urban area), Newman temporarily was, after the fall of John Howard, the holder of the highest political post occupied by a Liberal in Australia. His parents were federal ministers.

''Everyone can contribute in some way and I ask residents not affected by the flooding to think about grabbing a shovel, putting on their safety gear and lending a hand,'' said Newman, who is negotiating with contractors. He's had offers of equipment and is urging owners of bobcats, dump trucks, front-end loaders and water tankers to contribute.

Bligh may have saved herself from the political noose. Until the floods, Queenslanders marked her down as Australia's least popular government leader, with just one in four voters participating in a November opinion poll by Galaxy rating her premiership as satisfactory. And voters were as harsh on her Labor government as NSW voters are on the Keneally government. Bligh's decision to launch an ambitious and unpopular sell-off of rail, ports and other public assets - without having spelt out the privatisation plan ahead of the last election, when the government only squeezed back anyway - had made the ousting of the Bligh government an almost foregone conclusion for the election due next year.

The floods crisis, however, bestowed on her the chance of an extraordinary political turnaround. Through regular news conferences she told Queenslanders, and Australians, the what, where, why, when and how of a complex, testing and changing event. She didn't retreat into babble, she didn't mask the nastiness of the situation, she spoke from the head and the heart, and she stood up to emotional and physical exhaustion, even if it showed.

''As we weep for what we have lost, and as we grieve for family and friends and we confront the challenge that is before us, I want us to remember who we are,'' said Bligh, finally sounding like a leader. ''We are Queenslanders. We're the people that they breed tough north of the border. We're the ones that they knock down, and we get up again.''

It had a Churchillian touch hardened by the inspiration of a wily football coach extracting the best from his charges. In tough times, leaders are punished for vacillation and obfuscation.

The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, exhibited neither but, ''shoulder to shoulder'' with Bligh, she seems locked in a Canberra-speak that is almost impenetrable to the unacquainted who eagerly seek clarity, explanation and reassurance. Being empathetic is not enough; you've got to be seen to be empathetic.

If social media avenues, talkback radio and coffee shop conversations are indicative, the Bligh metamorphosis went down a treat with voters, but the PM did not. Whether Bligh's apparent revival persists, however, will depend in part on whether she can steer Queensland to a sound recovery.

The clean-up will be massive and unpleasant. It will take months and billions of dollars from public and private purses. Whether demands on government expenditure undo Canberra's promise to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13 will depend on how long recovery spending lasts.

Lost production will hurt the national economy, but not as much as many might expect, particularly once the stimulatory effects of recovery spending help counter the downturn. Economists predict economic growth could dip 0.25 to 0.5 of a percentage point, still leaving a robust net growth of about 3 per cent. But the short-term effect of higher food prices, combined with strains the flood recovery will place on an already tight labour market, threaten to push up inflation, risking higher interest rates.

But that's all down the track. Restoring hygiene and other civic amenity is the first priority. The water is a repulsive murky brown and, in Queensland's summer heat, will soon stink of sewage and other contaminants. Containment of infectious diseases is a high priority. Almost like the Ancient Mariner, water is everywhere but the drinking supply is limited by the risk of contamination.

Millions of tonnes of mud cover much beneath the water, which may start to recede more quickly from Monday. But electricity cannot be restored to wide parts of Brisbane until substations are cleared of water, and homes, factories and offices are individually checked for safety.

The focus on Brisbane, of course, is due to scale. Shocking though they are, the floods there are no worse than in many other cities and towns across a state 75 per cent disaster-affected. With 2 million people, however, there's many more exposed to the ravages. And many homeowners - maybe half of them - do not have flood insurance, and many of those who do are under-insured.

Governments will have a tough time persuading an insurance industry to cut the uninsured and underinsured some slack. ''If people do not purchase flood cover insurance, they will not be covered,'' said a spokesman for the Insurance Council of Australia.

Against the escalation of damage this week alone, estimates of a $10 billion repair bill are hopeful guesswork. Across the state, roads and bridges and rail lines will need replacing, thousands of houses are unliveable, workplaces are useless, coalmines are closed, crops are destroyed, equipment is written off and, of course, lives are lost.

In terms of sheer physical force and shock power, however, the hardest hit was the Lockyer Valley, at the bottom of the Great Dividing Range and below Toowoomba, which was deluged on Monday by a rain storm so severe and concentrated that its resultant deadly flooding of the Garden City was likened by the police chief, Bob Atkinson, to an ‘‘inland tsunami’’.

Toowoomba and its consequences changed the month-long waiting game. In this land of droughts and flooding plains, floods usually are the most predictable natural disasters. As rains swell the head waters, hydrologists mostly get generous lead times to predict peaks downriver. The poor souls in the farms and villages at the bottom of the Toowoomba escarpment got all of about five to 10 minutes of what Greg Cleland, a supermarket manager at Withcott (population 1200), called a ‘‘a wall of water coming down the range from Toowoomba’’. No alarm technology can meaningfully cope with that.

Most of the confirmed dead are from the valley, as are most of those feared dead. How did these locals cope?

Sandy Creek is usually little more than a trickle, but five times since Christmas it has burst its banks, sending water on to the streets of Grantham, a village effectively washed away.

‘‘We never stood a chance,’’ said Lance Richardson, the publican. Nobody in its way was safe when the wall of water surged down from Toowoomba. In the Grantham Hotel, Richardson was trapped with his elderly mother, Morva, son Evan, 13, and two customers.

‘‘At first it was like a normal flood that we’ve come to expect, then it just came so fast,’’ said Richardson. ‘‘When I saw a shipping container coming down the street, I knew we were in trouble.’’

The hotel’s verandah started to crack and the five shifted to the deck behind the pub. Without this concrete structure, and its steel supports, said Richardson, ‘‘we would have been washed away’’.

‘‘Everything you can imagine was coming past. Cars, washing machines, houses, sheds, everything.’’ And things the group would rather not have seen. The house next door collapsed. Brenda Ross, 58, her partner, Chris Face, 60, and son, Josh Ross, 25, all are believed to have died.

‘‘It’s hard to believe but one minute it was there and then there was nothing. It was just gone.’’

As brief as the warning was from further up the valley, some in Grantham were given enough time to make good an escape. It ‘‘may have saved our lives’’, says Robert Wilkin, who directed his wife and three daughters to flee to higher ground while he drove around warning others, stopping an elderly neighbour walking into the flood to get home, and reaching his fishing boat on his driveway just in time. With his brother Jim, he got the  engine going just as the street turned into a river. ‘‘I got in the boat to save my own skin but there were people being swept along by the water who were holding on to the fence by the railway line. There was a middle-aged lady and her son clinging to a fence – they were both screaming.

‘‘I managed to get the boat alongside and we heaved them in. Then there was another woman who was also holding on to a fence ... We got her in the boat.’’

With the engine clogging with mud, other people drifted by, in the water and sitting on cars. The Wilkins couldn’t help them but have since learnt they survived.

‘‘But you do think about what you could have done or, if the same thing happened again, whether you’d do the same or not. It was like being in a movie. I just hope I’m never in that position again.’’

Eventually the boat was washed up on the railway embankment, which had now been submerged, and the passengers scrambled to safety. The fishing boat remains on the railway track – one of the few Wilkin possessions left.Throughout the valley, reminders are everywhere. Police tape around a gate or letterbox marks every property checked for victims. Roads are torn up, a bridge is buckled, houses are gutted.

A minibus pulls up outside the Murphys Creek Tavern, flood relief HQ for the few thousand people in the low-lying valley between Helidon and Withcott, with a man in his 60s with three children – from toddler to early teens.

They have lost next to everything, so Sue and another relief volunteer hand over piles of children’s clothes, a blanket, and a small foam children’s couch, which seems to leave the children particularly chuffed.

Such is local self-reliance, says Sue, who doesn’t want her surname used, that ‘‘if you don’t take it to them they won’t ask for help’’.

That’s the thing about this Lockyer Valley, where 11 people from two families are missing. Its residents have weathered a decade of drought, then crop-killing floods and now this.

They are used to coping but mostly they’re used to helping themselves, and each other.

So in Gatton, where hundreds of Grantham flood evacuees spent the week marooned while police raked over the remains of their homes, the frustration is palpable. ‘‘You sort of want to get in and do things but there’s nothing for you to do,’’ says Paul Armstrong, whose family has lived in Grantham since the 1930s.

The activity hiatus will be brief, however. ‘‘We now face a reconstruction task of postwar proportions,’’ said  Bligh on Thursday. It’s an assessment few Australians would challenge, given their grasp of the extent of this calamity.

with Tom Reilly, Georgina Robinson and Lindsay Murdoch


