AAP

Queensland faces a reconstruction task of post-war proportions and it may be many months before some of the thousands of evacuees can go home, an emotional premier has warned.

After Brisbane was crippled by flooding and a third of Ipswich went under water, authorities were increasingly concerned that the border town of Goondiwindi would be the next to be hit by raging floodwaters.

The town's 6000 residents were on standby to evacuate on Thursday night.

About 3000 people are in evacuation centres across the state and 60 schools and almost 90 kindergartens and childcare centres have been severely damaged or are inaccessible.

The death toll from the floods disaster rose to 15 with three more men added to the growing list of victims on Thursday and Premier Anna Bligh warned more bodies were expected to be found.

Authorities hold grave fears for 12 people - 11 of them missing from the Lockyer Valley community of Murphys Creek, and most of those 11 from just two families. Overall some 61 people were still listed as missing.

An exhausted Ms Bligh shed tears on Thursday, overwhelmed by the scale of death and destruction that has swept three quarters of the sprawling state.

"As we weep for what we have lost, and as we grieve for family and friends and we confront the challenge that is before us, I want us to remember who we are," she said, her voice cracked with emotion.

"We are Queenslanders. We're the people that they breed tough, north of the border. We're the ones that they knock down, and we get up again."

In Brisbane, floodwaters kept their grip on city residents throughout the day after a lower than expected peak of 4.46 metres hit with the high tide at 4am (AEST), leaving 11,900 homes and 2500 businesses flooded.

A further 14,700 homes and 2500 businesses have been partially affected and 67 suburbs affected.

At Ipswich, to the west, waters receded more quickly, leaving residents to contemplate the recovery task ahead, with 3000 homes flooded and businesses in the CBD inundated.

Ms Bligh said it could take months before some Queenslanders could return to their flooded homes, with the state government ordering demountables from across Australia to provide temporary to medium-term housing for families with nowhere to go.

"For some people we acknowledge that it's going to take months and months and months and you will need interim accommodation on a temporary basis," she said.

A task force of 200 police, codenamed Operation Safeguard, will patrol flood-affected areas in Brisbane and Ipswich to guard against predatory criminals.

"That will give us a good spread and a sufficient spread of police and patrol vehicles to maintain a 24/7 patrol presence in every one of the flood-affected localities in Brisbane and Ipswich for several weeks," Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson said.

He said there'd been few instances of looting so far, but police would not take any chances.

Ms Bligh urged all Queenslanders to put their hands up to join the recovery effort and get the state back on its feet after the worst natural disaster in its history, with 70 cities and towns affected by flooding.

"As we look across our state we've seen three-quarters of our state having experienced the devastation of raging floodwaters, and we now face a reconstruction task of post-war proportions," the premier said.

With the defence force and the coroner only now getting a proper look at the worst-affected communities in the Lockyer Valley, including Grantham, Murphys Creek and Withcott, more bodies will certainly be found.

Crews have gone into some houses, but the damage from Monday's inland tsunami is so severe that machinery has been brought in to see if bodies are trapped underneath.

"I am sure we, as we go through this process of meticulously searching some of the very isolated areas and remote farm houses, buildings that have collapsed and waterways, unfortunately will receive more bad news in relation to victims of this very tragic event," state disaster co-ordinator Ian Stewart said.

Drinking water has dropped to critically low levels in the Lockyer Valley.

As clean-up efforts got under way in some areas hit by the state's three-week floods crisis, authorities were worried that the town of Goondiwindi would be next to be hit when the Macintyre River peaked early Friday morning.

About 60 patients from the local hospital and nursing home at Goondiwindi were being airlifted to higher ground at Inglewood and Warwick, which is also flooded.

Ms Bligh said the river's predicted peak of 10.85 metres - just below the levee bank of 11 metres - left a "very small margin of error".

Queensland's vital supply line - the Bruce Highway - will reopen on Friday afternoon after two weeks of closure.

Ms Bligh said the race was on to ensure that flood-affected schools could open as normal on the first day of term one at the end of the month, although she acknowledged that may not be possible for "a couple" of schools.

All beaches along the Redcliffe peninsula, at the mouth of the Brisbane River, have been closed indefinitely because of the amount of debris being washed up.


