Police are preparing to release the names of 28 people believed to be missing in the wake of the devastating south-east Queensland floods.

The list will be published either tonight or tomorrow, a Queensland Police spokeswoman said.

The number of people missing has fluctuated greatly this week with local councils and police each keeping their own lists.g

Overnight, police said the number of people missing had fallen to 20 from 53, but Queensland Police Deputy Commissioner Ian Stewart said on Saturday it had been revised up to 28.

The death toll from the floods remains at 16.

''There has been some volatility in the number of missing persons,'' Mr Stewart said.

''Police became aware of a separate list of missing persons compiled by the local council in the Lockyer area overnight, and we've been working hard to reconcile their list against ours.

''Unfortunately, our list has now got a registered 28 persons that we are investigating as missing persons.''

The remaining missing are all from the Toowoomba and Lockyer Valley region, where a wall of water destroyed homes and buildings on Monday.

Grave concerns remain for 12 people, including 11 from two families at Murphys Creek.

The biggest defence deployment for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy has been sent into Queensland, where the epicentre of the state's floods disaster resembles a war zone.

Authorities yesterday warned the bodies of some victims may never be found.

Massive clean-up begins

The crisis, which has affected three-quarters of the state including the capital Brisbane over the past three weeks, is far from over, although the border town of Goondiwindi looks to have avoided becoming the latest casualty.

Premier Anna Bligh said Queensland was determined to begin the process of cleaning up, recovery and rebuilding.

"I hope and pray that mother nature is leaving us alone to get on with the job of cleaning up and recovering from this event," she said.

Across Queensland 86 communities have been affected by flooding, with some towns deluged three times by floodwaters.

Some towns and Brisbane suburbs remain totally cut off and it may be early next week before the CBD returns to normal.

At Grantham, the epicentre of this week's Lockyer Valley and Toowoomba floods, a massive search effort for the missing covers 200 kilometres of waterways.

Ms Bligh and Prime Minister Julia Gillard visited the town on Friday.

"What I saw can only compare to a war zone or perhaps a cyclonic hurricane," Ms Bligh said.

"The way that the town has been literally picked up and turned around and deposited in fields and roads is going to be very difficult for people to come home from the evacuation centres and see."

Across Queensland more than 4400 people remain in 50 evacuation centres, with 7500 more registered as being displaced from their homes.

In total, 17,500 homes and 3000 businesses have been flooded.

Ms Gillard said the number of defence force personnel involved in the flood operation will be doubled to 1200.

"This will be the biggest deployment for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy," Ms Gillard said yesterday.

The death toll rose to 16 with the discovery of a woman's body near Grantham on Friday.

Emergency Services Minister Neil Roberts said the force of the water had carried victims a long way.

"One of the people who are confirmed deceased was found 80 kilometres downstream from where they were reported missing," he said.

"I think this just demonstrates and highlights the complexity of these search and rescue operations and also the time that's going to be consumed searching all of the creeks and streams associated with this river system."

After searching homes on Thursday, Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson said crews were starting to sort through the huge piles of debris that had been left scattered throughout the valley.

He said it was possible some bodies may never be found.

"This search can't possibly be completed until some time next week," he said.

"And we could not exclude the possibility that someone may never be found."

Some communities, such as Theodore in central Queensland, have been evacuated entirely.

Flooded towns hold their breath

The town of Condamine has been evacuated twice in a fortnight and is waiting for floodwaters to peak over the weekend.

Fears have abated for the Queensland/NSW border town of Goondiwindi where the Macintyre River was holding steady late on Friday.

Flood levels in the Brisbane and Bremer rivers were falling on Friday, while Bundaberg was enduring its second flood in 10 days.

A team of 80 specialist fire and rescue officers and 36 recruits has been deployed into Ipswich and Brisbane to help the clean-up and assessment effort.

In Brisbane, the water has affected more than 26,000 homes, with 11,900 homes completely submerged and another 14,700 partially flooded.

Thousands will have to call in specialists before turning on any gas or electrical appliances, with Ms Bligh estimating the process could take a while.

"These are houses that have been inundated right up to their rooftops, it could be weeks," she said.

"Some of these houses will have to be demolished, so they won't be getting supply back on until there's a new house there."

Some Brisbane suburbs, including Moggill and Bellbowrie, are still isolated and Defence is getting supplies through to residents.

Dirranbandi in the state's south-west remains completely isolated, as it has been for more than a week.

The town could be isolated well into February and the government was working to ensure it had the supplies it needed, Ms Bligh said.

Ms Bligh warned it was still only the beginning of the wet season and more massive downpours were likely with the weather bureau advising that five cyclones could be on their way over the next few months.

Ten people - nine in Brisbane and another in Ipswich - have been charged with looting.

- with AAP and staff reporters


