Queenslanders are likely to be caught short, facing additional costs for property lost in floods but not covered by their insurance policies, consumer and industry groups say.

The groups say some policies contain confusing definitions and others simply will not be sufficient to cover the full replacement of lost homes and possessions.

Consumer group Choice examined 45 insurance policies available nationwide and found only 13 - about 30 per cent - cover riverine or inland floods, or the swelling of river and creek banks, problems commonly seen as rains battered Queensland.

Four of those insurance policies analysed cover riverine/inland floods – but only as an option.

Flood types that are not covered could leave affected homeowners exposed to additional costs, said Choice spokeswoman Ingrid Just.

“There is not one standard definition for floods and that makes it very difficult for people to understand what they're covered for,” said Ms Just. “We're concerned that there is no single definition for flood.”

Some homeowners may have chosen an inappropriate policy because of the confusing nature of definitions. Choice estimates about 3 per cent of Australian properties are at “grave risk” of flooding.

The Insurance Council of Australia today cautioned that some households are likely to be underinsured for the type of damage caused by the natural disaster in Queensland.

“It is important to note that not all insurance policies will cover policyholders for this type of flood event,” said Rob Whelan chief executive of the ICA. “Policyholders should contact their insurer for clarification.”

Of the three types of flooding, the type most commonly covered is flash flooding or stormwater flooding, according to the Insurance Council.

"These are terms often used to identify water that is produced by high intensity but short-duration storms producing very localised flooding conditions," the ICA said.

Riverine flooding is caused by rivers and creeks swelling "due to long duration rainfall over large catchment areas...

"Insurance policies differ greatly in terms of how they identify this type of risk," the ICA said.

A third type of flood insurance, which covers flooding from the sea, is much less common, the industry body said.

"Coastal properties can often be grossly exposed to this type of risk or associated damage,” the ICA said.

The ICA said insurance claims will be processed on a case-by-case basis "taking into account the nature of the damage sustained and the terms and conditions of each insurance policy".

Choice estimated before the floods that 80 per cent of Australians nationwide were underinsured.

“So sadly I think we're going to see people financially worse off despite the fact they have insurance,” Ms Just said.

The ICA said flood victims should not worry if their insurance documents were damaged or missing; policies can be located with a policyholders' name and address.

So far insurers have received 7000 claims with an estimated insurable value of $365 million arising from the Queensland floods, with about three quarters of those property claims and one quarter motor vehicle claims, according to the ICA.

“These figures do not at this stage include claims from damage in Toowoomba and Brisbane or large industrial and mining claims,” the council said.The Queensland floods may cost insurers and reinsurers worldwide as much as $6 billion in what might be Australia’s costliest disaster in history, Bloomberg reported today.Insured losses from this week’s deluge in and around Brisbane may be as high as $4 billion, while damage from floods further north late last year may cost $2 billion, according to Milan Simic, managing director of catastrophe modeler AIR Worldwide.

czappone@fairfax.com.au

BusinessDay with Bloomberg


