AT THE end of Peter Carey's Booker prizewinning novel Oscar and Lucinda a glass church floats down a river. This week in Brisbane all the great and small possessions of life swept fast down the city's broken river. There was no glass church but the spectacle was so surreal anything seemed possible.

Tyres, windows, mattresses, children's pencil cases and pontoons festooned with deck chairs rushed past while Brisbane's astonished residents, many of them weaned on reality TV, Facebook and live Twitter streaming, struggled to comprehend that the fantastic images before them were not digital but actual.

Everyone safe and dry appeared to have a camera. It was as if no one could imagine such a scene without somehow capturing it or processing it, without immediately transmitting it somewhere else. Premier Anna Bligh called the Queensland floods ''the worst natural disaster in our history'' but it was also Brisbane's first disaster to be broadcast as it happened.

For many of those luckier citizens of River City, or BrizVegas as it is fondly known, the floods were an apocalypse knees-up. There were parties and spontaneous booze-ups, vans selling hot dogs from riverside vantage points, families with excited children past their bedtimes.

Prime Minister Julia Gillard was up at the Kangaroo Point cliffs overlooking the city doing interviews, George Negus was there too, and that ''news dude'' from TV (as one excited citizen called him). ''It's the greatest show in town,'' said the news dude live to camera.

The day the river broke its banks was incongruously sparkling, the sun blazing, washing out, everyone disbelieving that in such a carnival atmosphere a flood could come.

It was as if the floods offered release from the mundane, from the health and safety culture, with its laws about public drinking and bicycle helmets and jay-walking and dogs on leashes.

People sat drinking alcohol on the stone walls atop the perilously high cliffs, which only a few weeks ago were roped off and patrolled by police so that Brisbane's citizens could safely watch the New Year's Eve fireworks.

''It's end-of-the-world party stuff,'' said prominent Brisbane architect Kevin Hayes, who was out sight-seeing on his bicycle on the eve of the king tide that burst the river's banks.

He was accompanied by his 20-year-old design student son, Patrick, who was taking photographs. ''Flood tourism,'' Patrick quipped.

Hayes, 60, was particularly happy to be in Brisbane for the floods, having missed the infamous 1974 floods because he was in Ireland.

He had already helped pack up the rowing shells at his rowing club by the river at Davies Park, West End, one of the first suburbs to go under. The water was already rising as they got the last boats out.

''There's always a heightened enjoyment of life in a crisis, don't you think?'' he said.

Certainly there was a thrill in the air, for fear always reveals to us what we most cherish.

Mothers clutched their children tighter, a man from the end of my street walked up the road carrying a cage of beautiful, iridescent birds, fluttering like flags. ''No way I'm leaving these behind, mate,'' he said as he passed. ''I'm taking them to Mum's.''

My suburb, the inner-city Kangaroo Point, was one of the 30 on flood alert. We were advised to get food and water in, candles, torches, and on Tuesday I ran around in a flap, my heart beating fast, wondering what to take in case we were flooded.

I was 16 in the '74 floods and remember it well: cleaning up houses with buckled walls, a mother crying because when the waters receded she discovered her teenage daughter's hidden contraceptive pills stuck to the window pane.

I remember my friend Adele Smout's grandparents, Brisbane's prominent medical couple Sir Raphael and Lady Cilento (parents of the actress Diane), being forced to evacuate the house they had lived in for 40 years, leaving behind priceless antique masks given to them by the Japanese ambassador, prints, photographs and decades of research and documents.

Now I live with my own two teenage sons, who did not like being disconnected from World of Warcraft and Call of Duty to pack emergency provisions.

What exactly do you pack if your life is about to be swept away?

I packed photographs and books and the journals I have kept since I was 20 (and which one day I will give to the State Library of New South Wales, which has already bought my papers). I packed letters from my grandmother who died in September and my dad's hat (he died in April). I wanted to pack everything.

Fortunately my neighbour, a geologist, had spent the previous days calculating the flood risk. He reckoned that as our houses weren't flooded in the '74 floods it was unlikely they'd be flooded this time, even if this new flood reached the historic peak of 1893.

As the Second World War was spoken of by some men and women as the best time of their lives, the flood forged new friendships and heightened emotions. People spoke to neighbours they hadn't spoken to previously, strangers spoke to strangers.

My neighbour who I hardly know asked me in for lunch, together with another neighbour who had been evacuated from her apartment closer to the river and who was staying in a hotel that had subsequently lost its electricity.

''I sat in the dark all last night listening to the radio,'' she said. ''It was wonderful.''

Everyone agreed that the ABC's 4QR had done an amazing job, managing to stay continually on air broadcasting updates even though its own premises were flooded. We kept the radio on as we shared bread and drink, already in short supply, and marvelled at the beauty of a single ripe tomato. ''Just think, this tomato will soon be as valuable as a diamond,'' the geologist said.

At lunch a friend, Janet England, rang from the stranded suburb of Bellbowrie. She and her husband Bob England and their children Georgia, 15, and Calan, 13 (plus an extra child who unluckily had stayed for a sleepover) had been without power for three days. The roads were cut off, the local supermarket flooded, and now there was talk of the water supply going.

''We're fine compared to people down the road who've lost everything,'' she said. ''We're pretty sure the army can drop in food supplies. We haven't had too much to worry about, really.'' The pool stayed clean, Bob taught the boys to play poker by candlelight and there was a wind-up gramophone and some funny old 78s.

During the days, with army choppers flying constantly overhead like a scene from Apocalypse Now, the boys played army games in the garden, untethered from Xbox and computers.

As it turned out, only 20,000 Brisbane homes in a city with a population of some 2 million were damaged by the flooding but every person in this city has been affected. Everyone knows someone who has been evacuated or someone whose medical treatment has been interrupted or a baby just born going home from hospital to a house without electricity.

The public transport system is in chaos, roads are still cut, the CityCat ferry service is not expected to operate for months, garbage collections are suspended, petrol is running low as are food supplies. There are now suggestions that water supplies may be rationed or suspended.

And, after Queensland has spent years trying to prove it is not different from the rest of Australia, not more red-neck or weirder or more anything, Anna Bligh has come out as a Queenslander. That is, a person bred tough, born to be knocked down but born to get up again.

There are signs going up now in the streets, outside shops, reading QUEENSLANDERS NEVER GIVE UP. Overnight the Brisbane floods seem to have united the stricken citizens of BrizVegas and turned them into a race called Queenslanders.

Susan Johnson is the author of eight novels and last year returned to live in Brisbane after 10 years in London.

 


