AAP

More than 7000 people remain isolated in northern NSW from devastating floodwaters that have begun to ease.

Entire towns have been evacuated, but a cyclone off the coast of flood-ravaged Queensland is expected to spare NSW and not bring any additional rain, the NSW State Emergency Service (SES) says.

The 'all clear' has been given for communities evacuated along the Clarence River on the NSW north coast but residents at Yamba and Iluka will remain cut off until Monday or Tuesday.

A total of 6000 people were isolated by floodwaters as of Saturday afternoon (AEDT).

"We're still resupplying them by flood boat," SES spokesman Phil Campbell said on Saturday.

"Water levels are falling in some areas, which means we can get high-clearance four-wheel drives in now but it's still not safe for members of the public to use some of the back roads at the Clarence Valley."

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding but the situation is set to improve.

"In NSW, the state is transitioning from the response phase to the recovery and resupply phase," Mr Campbell said.

Most of the 650 residents of Boggabilla, near the Queensland border, had been evacuated by the time the Macintyre River peaked at 12.6 metres at midday (AEDT) on Friday.

"About 30 people remain in Boggabilla but those people are isolated. They're in a part of a town that's safe and on high ground," Mr Campbell said.

Thirty per cent of the town was submerged, swamping backyards and a caravan park.

All of the 200 residents in the nearby town of Toomelah have left, and the SES said a number of properties had been cut off by floodwaters.

Further west, the village of New Angledool became isolated on Sunday.

The river has passed the previous record of 2.87m and was slowly rising towards a peak of 3.1m.

At least 36 residents in the town became isolated.

In far west NSW, the 350 residents of Goodooga are isolated and expected to remain that way for another four to eight weeks.

The SES will continue to resupply the town by helicopter and is monitoring downstream communities including Bourke, Louth, Tilpa, Wilcannia and Menindee.

In the Broken Hill region, several hundred farmers were stranded from heavy rains that battered Victoria on Friday.

Some of the hardest-hit areas included Wilcannia, White Cliffs and Menindee.

"The dirt roads are still closed in western NSW," Mr Campbell said.

Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced on Saturday that the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) will be available to NSW residents impacted by flooding in disaster-declared Local Government Areas.

The AGDRP is a one-off payment of $1000 per eligible adult and $400 per eligible child to help them recover.

"This assistance is being extended to parts of northern NSW as we experience unprecedented flooding in large parts of Australia," Ms Gillard said as she toured Grafton with Attorney-General Robert McClelland.

Saturday's announcement is over and above the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy - a government payment for employees, small-business owners and farmers whose ability to work has been affected by the flooding.

Other joint Commonwealth/NSW government help is also being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), including grants of up to $15,000 for small businesses and primary producers affected by flooding.


