AAP

About 6,000 people are still stranded the NSW north coast as flooding in the state eases.

The swollen Clarence River has stranded resident in the downstream towns of Iluka, Yamba and Maclean.

"We're still resupplying them by flood boat," State Emergency Service (SES) spokesman Phil Campbell said on Saturday.

"Water levels are falling in some areas, which means we can get high clearance four-wheel drives in now but it's still not safe for members of the public to use some of the backroads at the Clarence Valley."

The vehicles are being used to deliver milk and bread, he said.

The SES estimates the isolation will continue for the next couple of days.

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding but the situation is set to improve.

"In NSW, the state is transitioning from the response phase to the recovery and resupply phase," Mr Campbell said.

Most of the 650 residents of Boggabilla, near the Queensland border, had been evacuated by the time the Macintyre River peaked at 12.6 metres at midday (AEDT) on Friday.

"About 30 people remain in Boggabilla but those people are isolated. But they're in a part of a town that's safe and on high ground," Mr Campbell said.

Thirty per cent of the town was submerged, swamping backyards and a caravan park.

All of the 200 residents in the nearby town of Toomelah have left, and the SES said a number of properties had been cut off by floodwater.

Several hundred farmers in western NSW are still stranded because of heavy rains.

The deluge that battered Victoria on Friday also hit a large area of NSW, including Wilcannia, White Cliffs and Menindee.

Mr Campbell said the SES had received 240 calls for help in Broken Hill, but the calls had all been cleared now.

"The rain has eased right off, they had a pretty dry night in Broken Hill," he said.

"The dirt roads are still closed in western NSW."

NSW Nationals leader Andrew Stoner has called on the state government to ensure the Pacific Highway is assessed immediately.

The Pacific Highway is closed between Grafton and south of the Iluka turn off and is likely to remain closed through the weekend.

The RTA was not re-assessing the situation until Monday, Mr Stoner said.

"Families stranded in Maclean were frustrated to discover the road is able to be used, but that they remain stuck there because it will not be re-assessed until Monday," Mr Stoner said in a statement on Saturday.

"Some people trapped away from home have already run out of essential medication.

"Kristina Keneally needs to step in to guarantee the Pacific Highway will be re-assessed today and that people with medical issues are evacuated at once."


