AAP

Prime Minister Julia Gillard says she is waiting for advice from Victorian Premier Ted Baillieu on what level of financial assistance the federal government can give the state for its current flood crisis.

Visiting the flood-hit town of Echuca, Ms Gillard said Mr Baillieu would determine the category of assistance required and inform the federal government.

She said she expected insurance companies to show the same generosity of spirit the Australian people had shown throughout the floods crisis which had devastated Queensland as well as hitting NSW, Tasmania and Victoria.

"What I would certainly say to them is they should be doing the right thing by the people of Australia at a time as tough as this," she said.

"My message to the insurance industry would be to show the same kind of spirit the people of Australia have been showing as they've really pulled together in these very difficult circumstances."

Treasurer Wayne Swan and Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten met with the insurance industry in Queensland on Friday.

Mr Swan had indicated a standardised definition of floods and flood damage may need to be considered in the future, Ms Gillard said.

Ms Gillard said there would be large economic consequences flowing from such a "huge catastrophe".

"The treasurer, Wayne Swan, today has said that in economic terms, this is probably the biggest natural disaster the country has faced," she said.

"We will be managing the federal budget so that we can meet the needs of recovery and rebuilding.

"I know that there is going to be a lot of effort, money and resources needed to rebuild, particularly rebuild Queensland."

The prime minister said many of the people whose homes had been flooded in Echuca, Victoria, told her their thoughts were with the people of Queensland.

"Even as they are managing their own personal circumstances, wondering what has happened to their own home, their best wishes and thoughts are with the people of Queensland. So, that's a lovely spirit," she said.

Ms Gillard said she felt moved during her visits to relief centres across the country.

"It makes me feel both privileged and humbled," she said.

"I've had the opportunity over the past few days to be in a number of evacuation and relief centres to hold a hand, to give a hug, to have a conversation, and I think that's a really important job for me, personally being there."

Ms Gillard said there would be tough questions asked in the coming days, particularly in Queensland, about what could be learnt from the floods.


