The appeal for cash in the stunned aftermath of Queensland's devastating and deadly floods is driving a huge response, with the $45 million raised in a few days just the tip of a growing iceberg of cash.

Queensland Premier Anna Bligh says it is certainly her state's worst natural disaster, and possibly Australia's.

Estimates of how much the overall costs of supporting the flood victims and rebuilding the destroyed areas range from $6 billion at the conservative end to $13 billion - about 1 per cent of the Australian economy.

So it's no surprise that many in Australia and overseas, including stars from sport and entertainment, have chipped in to support Ms Bligh's flood relief appeal, with $45 million raised as of 3pm yesterday.

This morning, seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong announced on his Twitter account that he had donated $50,000 to the relief effort and was hosting a Twitter cycling ride at Glenelg in Adelaide tomorrow.

"Please visit www.qld.gov.au/floods to donate. I'm personally pledging $50,000 to the relief efforts. Please help! Livestrong!" he tweeted.

English cricketer Kevin Pietersen is auctioning his Ashes shirt and bat, and plane and match tickets on eBay, with current bid levels at £21,000 ($33,000) as of 11am, joining Socceroo star Tim Cahill, whose "Everton Experience" eBay listing is currently selling at $60,950.

Former Australian spin bowler Shane Warne said this week that he was planning a fund-raising Warne XI and Michael Vaughan XI Twenty20 legends cricket match.

Tennis stars visiting the country for the Australian Open in Melbourne have dug deep, with American Andy Roddick donating $10,800 to the flood relief. The sport's top players - Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic, Kim Clijsters and Sam Stosur - are also playing in the "Rally for Relief" tennis match at the Rod Laver Arena at 2pm this Sunday to raise money for victims.

The AFL Players' Association confirmed this morning that $150,000 would be donated from the players' charity relief fund to the Queensland flood appeal. It comes after the AFL and its 18 member clubs pledged to donate $500,000 this week.

Gold Coast street party

In the Gold Coast, the "Mates in Need" fund-raiser will be held along the length of the Tedder Avenue restaurant strip, famous for its party atmosphere during the annual Gold Coast 600 V8 Supercars race.

The party's hosts - billionaire Gerry Harvey, his wife Katie Page-Harvey and Myer chief executive Bernie Brookes - are in the region for the annual Magic Millions race carnival and yearling sales.

"The question you hear from everyone as the flood crisis continues is - What can I do to help?" Mr Harvey asked in a media statement.

""Now we have an answer - come to Tedder Ave on Friday night and give generously."

The carnival has already donated $250,000, with other VIPs chipping in with amounts of $25,000 and more, leading to expectations that the party will raise more than $1 million for the cause.

Other businesses are also pitching in, with retailer Jeanswest revealing this morning that it would be donating all its in-store and online profits for tomorrow to the appeal.  Foster's, Vodafone, Commonwealth Bank, Wesfarmers, Etihad, TABCorp, XSTRATA Queensland, Optus, Telstra, Suncorp and Virgin Blue are among other companies with donations or fund-raising initiatives.

Comedy, music and dance

Entertainers are organising one-off events to raise funds. The Tamworth Country Music Festival is hosting a fund-raising event at The Pub in Tamworth next Wednesday. Gold Coast musician Casey Barnes has written a single Never Break You in support of the flood victims. It is selling it on iTunes with all proceeds going to the flood appeal.

Evapor-aid, a comedy fund-raiser featuring appearances by Offspring star Eddie Perfect and an unnamed international performer, will be staged at The Comedy Store at Moore Park this Sunday.

In Melbourne on January 19, dancers such as Grant Smilie and Ruby Rose will be taking part in a "Dance Aid" show at the Prince Bandroom.

More than $392 million was raised for the 2009 Victorian bushfires through the Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund.

with AAP

How you can help:

Follow Environment on Twitter 


