AAP

Worldwide support and sympathy from more than 100 governments has been extended to the Queensland flood victims, Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd says.

"We have been inundated with expressions of solidarity, support and offers of military aid ... as well as other forms of assistance as well," the former prime minister and member for the federal Brisbane seat of Griffith told the Seven Network on Thursday.

"Yesterday, the Indonesian foreign minister was on the phone to me - they're sticking money into the premier's appeal here to help those families who fall through the cracks.

"I would say at least 100 governments around the world have been on the phone to myself, the prime minister, expressing solidarity and support."

Mr Rudd said the attitude of Australians in times of natural disasters is one of comradeship and generosity and those are now being recouped.

"The thing about Australia is, we're used to going out and helping," he said.

"There's bad things happen in the world and we say `what are we going to do about it?' and off we go. And we do things and the good people of Australia, they put their hand in their pocket and they provide money.

"It's unusual for the world to see us in trouble and so when they see us in trouble, I think there's a natural response: `The Australians are always there for us, let's let them know that they're not alone'. Which is a good sense of being part of the human family."

The offers of international support have come from Asia, Europe and America, Mr Rudd said.

"I've been in this business for a while in one capacity or another and this is quite spontaneous from across the region, from across the world - far flung Africa, Latin America, people ringing in saying `what's happening? Is there any way we can help?' And it's been a genuine expression of international concern," Mr Rudd said.

"On the BBC yesterday they were asking me for example, why haven't we taken for example, offers of military assistance, to whichI say: `this is a sunburnt country, a land of flood and drought, we're used to it'.

"We're not used to it on this scale in Queensland but our natural disaster preparedness is pretty good by international standards.

"The worst thing you can do is have a whole lot of uncoordinated delivery of stuff from around the world, plonked on your doorstep."

Mr Rudd praised the actions of his Labor Party colleague and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, for her constant updates on the flood disaster, while dealing with such a significant misfortune.


