Tunisia's speaker of parliament took power on Saturday amid chaotic scenes in the streets of the capital after President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled from protests after 23 years of iron-fisted rule.

The army locked down central Tunis to prevent further demos and AFP reporters saw soldiers and plainclothes security personnel dragging dozens of suspected looters out of their cars at gunpoint and taking them away in trucks.

The crackdown followed a night of looting in Tunis and its suburbs.

Several stolen cars were seen smashed up and abandoned in the streets and some shops and luxury homes had been pillaged and burnt out, with the violence appearing to target in particular the property of Ben Ali's family.

Tunisian Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi denounced the looting and the country's Constitutional Council ruled that the speaker of parliament, Fouad Mebazaa, a close ally of Ben Ali, should assume the interim presidency.

The council declared the head of state had "definitively" left power and declared that elections should be held within a maximum of 60 days.

International powers including Europe and the United States urged calm in Tunisia and called for a democratic process in the north African state following events that Tunisian Internet users dubbed the "Jasmine Revolution".

US President Barack Obama earlier hailed the "courage" and "dignity" of Tunisian protesters and called for "free and fair elections".

The Arab League on Saturday called on Tunisian political forces to unite and bring back peace, saying the events in Tunisia were "historic".

The league urged all to "work together for the return of calm and security and stability," and to reach "a national consensus to bring the country out of this crisis while guaranteeing the respect of the will of the Tunisian people."

The change of power in Tunisia was the first time in recent history that a leader of the Arab world has been toppled by pressure from street protests.

Ben Ali first tried to crack down and then offered concessions but he ultimately failed to quell the public's anger against his regime.

Ghannouchi took over immediately upon Ben Ali's hasty departure on Friday after riots in Tunis that came at the end of weeks of protests by ordinary Tunisians against poverty, unemployment and alleged government corruption.

A state of emergency has been declared in Tunisia as a whole that bans demonstrations and a strict dusk-to-dawn has been put in place, with orders given to security forces to shoot anyone disobeying orders or fleeing.

"It is unacceptable that the looting continues," Ghannouchi said in an interview on Al-Jazeera television.

"We are making every effort to restore order throughout the country," the prime minister added.

He said Ben Ali's departure was "final".

There was relief among many Tunisians over the toppling of the widely-hated Ben Ali but also fears for the future of the country.

"A dictatorship is finished. This is like the French Revolution," Farhat Hafayedh, 56, a retired factory worker, told AFP.

"Now it's going to happen in Algeria and in Egypt," he said.

Cafes were crammed with young men discussing the latest events and there were crowds outside the few grocery stores that were open in the capital.

Posters of Ben Ali had been torn down in many parts of the city.

Tanks and armoured personnel carriers were deployed in and around Tunis, with the central Avenue Bourguiba -- where thousands of protesters had massed on Friday to call for Ben Ali's ouster -- was closed to the public.

Repeated bursts of gunfire were heard in the centre during the night.

In a dramatic address on state television on Friday, Ghannouchi announced that he had taken over and promised social and political reforms.

Government sources said that Ben Ali had been flown out of the country's main international airport bound for an unknown destination. France refused asylum and Saudi Arabia later said it had taken in the former president.

Ben Ali came to power in a bloodless coup in 1987 at a time of stagnation for Tunisia and he was initially hailed by many people for enacting liberal economic reforms as well as nipping in the bud the Islamist Ennahdha party.

He later came under growing criticism for authoritarianism and corruption.

Analysts said the abrupt change of power was likely to send shockwaves around a region dominated by veteran leaders like the 74-year-old Ben Ali.

Tunisia borders two other authoritarian regimes -- Algeria and Libya.

The revolt in Tunisia "is the first popular uprising to succeed in removing a president in the Arab world," said Amr Hamzawy of the Carnegie Middle East Centre based in Beirut.

"It could be quite inspiring for the rest of the Arab world."

The rare protests in tightly controlled Tunisia were unleashed by the suicide attempt last month of Mohamed Bouazizi, who set himself on fire after police prevented him from selling fruit and vegetables to make a living.

The 26-year-old graduate died of his injuries in hospital last week.

According to a Paris-based human rights group, at least 66 people have been killed in the protests, about three times more than the official toll.

As tensions have grown, thousands of holidaymakers have been evacuated from the Mediterranean nation's famous beach resorts, and Europe and the United States advised their citizens against non-essential travel to the country.


