A trio of female politicians was visiting shot US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords in an Arizona hospital when she opened her eyes for the first time on Wednesday.

House of Representatives Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi of California, Debbie Wasserman-Schultz of Florida and Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York had come to show support for Ms Giffords, who was gravely wounded in a mass shooting in Arizona on Saturday that claimed six lives and wounded 14.

They were in the Arizona Democrat's hospital room when they say she opened her eyes, shortly after she was visited by President Barack Obama.

"We had been telling her that she was inspiring the country with her courage and that we couldn't wait to take her out to pizza and a weekend away," Ms Gillibrand said through a spokeswoman.

"Then after she heard our voices and the encouragement of [her husband] Mark and her parents, she struggled briefly and opened her eyes for the very first time. It was a miracle to witness."

Ms Pelosi added to CNN: "As you can imagine, it was a glorious moment."

At a rousing memorial service earlier, Mr Obama told the crowd Ms Giffords had opened her eyes just minutes after he left her bedside.

"Gabby opened her eyes for the first time. So I can tell you she knows we are here. She knows we love her. And she knows that we are rooting for her through what is undoubtedly going to be a difficult journey."

The shock statement brought a packed crowd of 14,000 people at the University of Arizona to its feet, wildly applauding.

Obama pays emotional Arizona tribute



In the speech Mr Obama implored Americans to cleanse their corroded democracy to fulfil the snuffed out hopes of a nine-year-old girl gunned down in the Arizona shooting tragedy.

In an emotive and rousing memorial service, Mr Obama said the innocent and emerging wonder at democracy of Christina Taylor Green should spur Americans to use her loss to purge the vicious divisiveness consuming public life.

"I want us to live up to her expectations. I want our democracy to be as good as she imagined it. All of us - we should do everything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children's expectations."

Soul-searching since the tragedy has focused on the toxic political climate and whether it in some way inspired the misfit gunman.

In a 35-minute eulogy that sought to unite a fractured America, Mr Obama called for a more civil public discourse and urged Americans not to turn on one another, Democrat upon Republican.

"At a time when our discourse has become so sharply polarised, at a time when we are far too eager to lay the blame for all that ails the world at the feet of those who think differently than we do.

"It's important for us to pause for a moment and make sure that we are talking with each other in a way that heals, not a way that wounds," he said.

Christina, "so curious, so trusting, so energetic and full of magic", was everyone's child, he said.

The President used the child, born on another day of tragedy, September 11, 2001, as a potent symbol to force America to wake up to its political ills.

The youngster was one of 50 babies born on that day to be pictured in a book called Faces of Hope, and Mr Obama recalled how there were "simple wishes for a child's life" written on either side of Christina's photo in the book, including: "I hope you jump in rain puddles."

"If there are rain puddles in heaven, Christina is jumping in them today," he said.

"And here on earth, we place our hands over our hearts, and commit ourselves as Americans to forging a country that is forever worthy of her gentle, happy spirit."

A funeral Mass for Christina, the youngest victim and now the most potent symbol of the Tucson tragedy, will be held on Thursday.

Unclear if  Giffords will recover

Although surgeons are upbeat about Ms Giffords's prognosis, it remains unclear if the 40-year-old rising star in the  Democratic  Party will ever make a full recovery.

In Washington, the House of Representatives put forward a bipartisan resolution on Wednesday condemning the attack and honouring the victims, with House Speaker John Boehner underscoring the importance of solidarity among members of congress.

"Our hearts are broken, but our spirit is not," Mr Boehner, choking back tears, told the chamber.

"We're thankful, so thankful that Gabby is still with us."

Some US liberals have claimed that the tragedy is somehow linked to a climate of hate whipped up by conservative political figures such as Sarah Palin.

Palin, a possible White House contender in 2012, forcefully rejected any responsibility for the shooting spree and accused critics of "blood libel" for tying her fiery political rhetoric to the assassination attempt.

"Acts of monstrous criminality stand on their own. They begin and end with the criminals who commit them," she said in a video message.

The family of 22-year-old alleged gunman Jared Loughner broke their silence on Tuesday, saying they were "so very sorry" for the massacre but shedding no light on their son's possible motivations.

Officials revealed on Wednesday that Loughner, who faces the death penalty because a federal judge was among his victims, was pulled over in his car for running a red light just three hours before the horrifying attack.

AFP


