LOS ANGELES: Gabrielle Giffords has not only opened her eyes, but is also communicating with her family, her doctors say.

''Her family has asked her very specific things and she has used her hand to communicate with them,'' said Michael Lemole, a neurosurgeon at Tucson's University Medical Centre and one of the surgeons who operated on Ms Giffords. That implied she had a good amount of cognitive functioning, Dr Lemole said.

He was at Ms Giffords's bedside when she first opened her eyes on Wednesday evening in the presence of family members and some of her colleagues from Congress, he said.

''It was probably a combination of the unexpected but familiar that prompted her to open her eyes and caused her to look around. That implies that the part of the brain that lets us awake from sleeping, the arousal centre'', is functioning, he said. ''That's a very important step on her move forward.''

She opened her eyes again later in the evening in response to a TV playing a speech by the President, Barack Obama.

''That consistency is important,'' Dr Lemole said. ''We want to see things repeated over and over again.''

On Thursday morning, Ms Giffords was acting more and more like someone waking up, yawning and rubbing her eyes said Peter Rhee, chief of trauma surgery at the hospital.

Her eyes also were beginning to track movements, another good sign, Dr Rhee said.

The next big hurdle, the doctors said, would be removing her breathing tube, which they are unlikely to do for a few more days. They are using it to blow warm, moist air into her lungs to prevent fluid accumulation that could lead to pneumonia. Ms Giffords is breathing on her own, however.

Once the tube is out, the doctors will be able to assess her ability to speak.

Ms Giffords's medical team was beginning aggressive physical therapy, which included sitting her up and dangling her legs over the side of the bed, Dr Lemole said. ''She is able to move both of her legs to command. That's huge. We say, 'Gabrielle, lift your legs up', and she lifts both of them up.''

Los Angeles Times




