TUCSON, Arizona: She had an easy smile and eyes the colour of mahogany. She was dainty one minute and a tomboy the next, trading a prim ballet outfit for a Little League uniform. She was the only girl on the Pirates baseball team and confident she would be the first woman in the major leagues.

She liked things that, even in a cynical age, were hard to argue with: singing, animals, climbing trees and helping the less fortunate.

In the days since Christina-Taylor Green became the youngest of those killed in Arizona's mass shooting, much has been made of her life.

The hard truth is that she was born on one terrible day and died on another, with just nine years in between.

Christina-Taylor was born on September 11, 2001, shot and killed last weekend and laid to rest on Thursday with little less than the promise of a better nation draped around her slender shoulders.

In an address the night before the service the President, Barack Obama, had challenged Americans to live up to Christina-Taylor's vision - to be, as the President put it, ''better friends and neighbours and co-workers and parents''.

In his sermon to the 1800 mourners at the funeral, the Catholic Bishop of Tucson, Gerald Kicanas, said: ''She wanted to make a difference with her life, to make her mark. She has done so in such a powerful way that even she could not have imagined.''

Bishop Kicanas said that even in death, Christina-Taylor helped others: she was an organ donor.

About a quarter of the mourners were children, many of them from her school or baseball league.

''Everybody's going to be OK,'' her father, John Green, told mourners. ''She'd want that.''

Addressing his daughter, directly, he said: ''I think you've affected the whole country. We'll never forget you.''

The private service was held at St Elizabeth Ann Seton Church, in north-west Tucson, near the foot of the Santa Catalina Mountains.

The church was decorated with pink flowers and photos of a grinning Christina-Taylor. Mourners spoke at an altar topped with a colourful Ojo de Dios, or God's eye, a tradition that dates to Spanish settlers and American Indians. Some believe the design is a window into the soul of God.

The astronaut Mark Kelly, the husband of the Arizona congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who was severely wounded in the attack, was at the funeral.

The mourners walked to the church beneath an enormous American flag, rescued from the attack on the World Trade Centre and repaired using retired flags from other states. A New York firefighter had brought it to Tucson.

Hundreds of people - families with children and elderly neighbours - lined the roadway leading to the church, many carrying single roses. Among them were about 20 people were dressed as angels.

They said they came in case members of a Kansas church showed up to protest.

The Westboro Baptist Church had threatened to picket the funeral because her family is Catholic but withdrew, in part because a syndicated radio show agreed to host some of its members.

The funeral was held five days after a gunman opened fire at a Tucson shopping centre, killing six, including Arizona's chief federal judge, and wounding 13, including Ms Giffords.

Jared Lee Loughner, 22, faces federal murder and attempted murder charges in the rampage. He is believed to have grown delusional before the attack; authorities believe he became fixated on Ms Giffords.

Some mental health advocates have criticised Pima Community College, where he went to school, for not intervening more aggressively last year as his behaviour became increasingly erratic.

The college released records on Wednesday showing that teachers called campus police because of concerns involving Mr Loughner five times, starting in January 2010, before he was suspended in late September.

''People were afraid of him and found a way to exclude him until he would come back with a letter from psychiatrist,'' Harvey Rosenthal, a New York mental health advocate who operates a rehabilitation services centre, said.

''That's not the kind of outreach and engagement people deserve.''

Los Angeles Times, The Washington Post




