HEZBOLLAH and its allies were threatening to quit the Lebanese government yesterday - a move that would probably end the rule of the Prime Minister, Saad Hariri, and destabilise the fragile state.

Hezbollah MPs said that they would abandon the coalition after months of wrangling over how to deal with criminal indictments likely to accuse group members of being behind the assassination of the former prime minister Rafiq Hariri in Beirut in February 2005.

The country's Health Minister, Mohammed Jawad Khalifeh, said ministers would resign unless Saad Hariri - Rafiq's son - agreed to convene an urgent cabinet meeting.

The threat followed months of tension that has threatened to split Lebanon on sectarian lines. Several regional initiatives have tried to broker face-saving deals for both Hezbollah and Mr Hariri's political bloc, which makes up most of the coalition.

At issue is the work of the United Nations-backed special tribunal for Lebanon, which has been investigating his father's death and that of 11 others who supported his bloc or opposed Syrian influence in Lebanon.

Hezbollah's threat was being perceived as brinkmanship by some members of Mr Hariri's bloc, who said the former had too much to lose by walking away. Lebanon's cabinet has not made a decision in the past three months as both sides remained at odds over the tribunal.

Saudi Arabia and Syria have taken a lead in one initiative, the full details of which have not been made public. However, it is known that Hezbollah expects Mr Hariri to disavow the tribunal's findings, which would make it difficult for those named in the indictments to be prosecuted.

Hezbollah's threat was being seen as an attempt to spoil a planned meeting yesterday between Mr Hariri and Barack Obama at the White House. Mr Obama has taken an active role in attempting to defuse the Lebanon tensions, which he and the US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, have said could spark a broader sectarian flare-up in the Middle East.

The US has insisted on the tribunal delivering its findings, and on the prosecution of those indicted. It would be a serious blow to Hezbollah, which casts itself as a nationalistic group whose militant acts against Israel, including a devastating war in July 2006, have been carried out in Lebanon's name.

Hezbollah's opponents have long viewed it as acting largely in the interests of its two regional backers, Iran and Syria, both of which are often at odds with the Sunni Muslim world, especially Saudi Arabia and Egypt.

Hezbollah has for the past three months sustained a heated campaign against the UN tribunal, saying it was picked by conspirators acting on behalf of the US and Israel.

Guardian News & Media




