AFP

Lebanon was without a government on Thursday after the powerful Shi'ite party Hezbollah and its allies resigned from the cabinet over a UN probe into the assassination of former premier Rafiq Hariri.

Energy Minister Gebran Bassil said 10 ministers had resigned because of a long-running dispute with Prime Minister Saad Hariri - son of the slain leader - over the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

An 11th minister close to President Michel Sleiman also quit the 30-member cabinet, providing the minimum number of resignations required to topple the government.

The government's collapse plunged Lebanon into its worst political crisis since 2008. It came as Hariri was holding talks in Washington with US President Barack Obama.

For months, Hezbollah, which is backed by Iran and Syria, has been pressing the Western-backed Hariri to disavow the special tribunal saying it is part of a US-Israeli plot.

According to unconfirmed press reports, the tribunal is poised to indict senior Hezbollah members in connection with Rafiq Hariri's 2005 assassination, a move the militant party vehemently rejects.

The White House accused Hezbollah of acting out of "fear" and commended Hariri "for his steadfast leadership and efforts to reach peace, stability, and consensus in Lebanon under difficult circumstances".

Hariri made no comment after his meeting with Obama but headed to Paris, where he was to meet President Nicolas Sarkozy on Thursday, his office said.

In Paris, Sarkozy "reaffirmed his support for Lebanese authorities and institutions", a statement from his office said.

Sarkozy voiced his support during a phone conversation with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, the Elysee palace said.

But Syria has said it can no longer mediate between Hezbollah and Hariri, one diplomat based in New York said.

Other diplomats said Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah had told UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and Sarkozy in meetings on Monday that he was halting his attempts to mediate between Hezbollah and Hariri.

Environment Minister Mohammad Rahhal, who is close to Hariri, told AFP Hezbollah's decision to quit the government was aimed at paralysing the state and forcing the premier to reject the tribunal.

"They think that by piling the pressure on him, Hariri will bend but they are mistaken," Rahhal said.

The Sunni premier has discussed the crisis in recent days in New York with Saudi King Abdullah, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Sarkozy and Ban.

Clinton, who was in Qatar on Wednesday, said Hezbollah's attempt to undermine stability in Lebanon was bound to fail.

"We view what happened today as a transparent effort by those forces inside Lebanon, as well as interests outside Lebanon, to subvert justice and undermine Lebanon's stability and progress," Clinton said.

"Trying to bring the government down as a way to undermine the special tribunal is an abdication of responsibility, but it also will not work."

"We believe that the work of the special tribunal must go forward, so justice can be served and impunity ended," she added.

Ban reiterated his "full support" for the tribunal, while urging dialogue among the rival Lebanese parties.

In London, British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Hezbollah's withdrawal was "extremely serious" and could have "grave implications" for stability across the Middle East.

Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Abul Gheit called on the parties to exercise "restraint" and to "act within the framework of (the country's) institutions to contain the crisis".

And Arab League chief Amr Mussa appealed to the country's factions "not to close the door of dialogue and to focus on the supreme interest of the country in order to avoid all danger".

The standoff between Hariri's camp and Hezbollah had virtually paralysed the government since its creation in November 2009. It sparked fears of sectarian violence similar to that which brought the country close to civil war in May 2008.

In 2008 Qatar helped mediate an end to an 18-month political standoff, but the country's foreign minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani, said that this time they would not be able to resolve the crisis.

Under the constitution, the president must consult with MPs and appoint a new premier to form a government. The prime minister is always a Sunni, and as Hariri is the most popular Sunni leader, he is likely to be reappointed.

The question is then whether he would accept.


