US President Barack Obama has thrown his full support behind embattled Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri as Hezbollah toppled his unity government during a White House visit.

Minutes after Mr Obama and Mr Hariri posed for photographers in the Oval Office, the Shiite militant group and its allies resigned on Wednesday from the cabinet over a UN probe into the assassination of Mr Hariri's father, the former premier.

A White House statement released after their talks said the actions by Hezbollah "only demonstrate their own fear and determination to block the government's ability to conduct its business and advance the aspirations of all of the Lebanese people".

According to unconfirmed press reports, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon is poised to indict senior Hezbollah members in connection with Rafiq Hariri's 2005 assassination, a scenario the militant party vehemently rejects.

Mr Obama commended Mr Hariri "for his steadfast leadership and efforts to reach peace, stability, and consensus in Lebanon under difficult circumstances".

"The President and Prime Minister expressed their determination to achieve both stability and justice in Lebanon during this challenging period of government volatility, and agreed that all parties should avoid threats or actions that could cause instability," the White House statement said.

Lebanon's hard-won unity government was made up of 30 ministers, 10 of them representing Hezbollah and its allies.

The Shiite militant group Hezbollah and its allies have been pressing Mr Hariri to disavow the UN tribunal on the grounds that it is part of a US-Israeli plot.

Syria and Saudi Arabia have for months been attempting to mediate the crisis but their efforts have failed, with rival Lebanese camps accusing each other of refusing to compromise.

"The President and Prime Minister specifically discussed united efforts with France, Saudi Arabia, and other key international and regional actors to maintain calm in Lebanon and ensure that the work of the tribunal continues unimpeded by third parties," the White House statement added.

AFP


