AP

President Barack Obama flew to Arizona on Wednesday to honour a wounded US congresswoman and pay tribute to the six people killed in the weekend attempt to assassinate her.

Searching for the right tone, Obama sought to console the country, not dissect its politics.

Obama and his wife, Michelle, headed for a night-time service in Tucson with a bipartisan delegation aboard Air Force One in a sign of solidarity.

Back on Capitol Hill, congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords' House of Representative colleagues praised her and the other shooting victims and insisted that violence would not silence democracy. She was the target of the first assassination attempt on a member of Congress in decades.

"We will have the last word," declared new the new leader of the House, Speaker John Boehner. He fought back tears as he described Giffords' battle to recover from Saturday's gunshot wound to her head.

Obama was again playing the role of national consoler that comes to all presidents and, in rare times, helps define them.

He drew on his own sombre experience, following the shooting rampage by one of the military's own members at the Fort Hood army post in 2009. Then, as expected now, Obama focused his comments on how the victims led their lives.

In Tucson, where thousands gathered for a public service at the University of Arizona's basketball arena, Obama was to meet privately with the families of those killed and wounded. In total, 19 people were shot, six fatally. Others were injured trying to flee the shooting.

His main mission was to give a warm and honourable portrait of the six people who were killed at Giffords' meeting with constituents last weekend. Their stories have already taken hold in a country consumed by this sad story; among those who died were a nine-year-old-girl, a prominent judge and a Giffords aide who was engaged to be married.

Obama was expected to speak about the courage of those who intervened to tackle the gunman and help the wounded. He was also assuring grieving families that the country was behind them. And to those grasping for answers, Obama was likely explore how "we can come together as a stronger nation" in the aftermath of the tragedy, as he put it earlier this week.

In times of calamity, the country has long turned to its presidents for the right words of assurance. It is test of leadership that comes with the job.

Recent history recalls George W Bush with a bullhorn amid the rubble of September 11, 2001, Bill Clinton's leadership after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 and Ronald Reagan's response to the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986, when he spoke about being "pained to the core".

For Obama, the most instructive lesson may be one from his own presidency.

He led the memorial at Fort Hood, trying to help a shaken nation cope with a mass shooting that left 13 people dead and more than two dozen wounded. He spent the first part of that speech naming the people who had been killed and describing how they spent their lives; he used the second half to remind everyone of American endurance and justice.

The shootings, apparently a brazen attempt to kill a member of Congress, shattered an event Giffords had organised outside a grocery as a way for her constituents to chat with her.

The violent episode has sparked a broader debate, unfolding in the media for days, about whether the vitriol of today's politics played a role. Obama has long called for the importance of more civil political discourse, but he has made no comments on that in connection to this shooting, and he was not expected to choose Wednesday night's event as the forum to do so.

Police say the man accused of the shootings, 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner, shot Giffords as well as many in the line of people waiting to talk with her. The attack ended when bystanders tackled the man. He is in jail on federal charges as police continue to investigate.

Four days after the shootings, Giffords was making small movements on her own. The three-term Democrat was expected to live. Obama was joined on Air Force One by Republican members of Arizona's congressional delegation, House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi, Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy, Attorney General Eric Holder and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano.

By mid-afternoon, the university said 17,000 people were in line for the event, exceeding the arena's intended capacity. Overflow seating was set up at the school's football stadium, with a video of the proceedings to be played on the scoreboard screen.


