TUCSON: Seeking to bring unity after several days of rancorous debate over why the shooting here last Saturday happened, Barack Obama was mostly on song in his address to a grieving nation, presidential watchers said.

He urged Americans not to turn on each other as they sought to comprehend the slaying of six people outside a supermarket.

Mr Obama said the facts behind the shooting would need to be examined because America could not remain passive in the face of such violence. ''We should be willing to challenge old assumptions in order to lessen the prospects of violence in the future,'' he said.

''But what we can't do is use this tragedy as one more occasion to turn on one another.

''Rather than pointing fingers or assigning blame, let us use this occasion to expand our moral imaginations, to listen to each other more carefully, to sharpen our instincts for empathy, and remind ourselves of all the ways our hopes and dreams are bound together.''

Commentators praised the conciliatory tone of the President's 30-minute speech at a televised memorial service for the shooting victims on Wednesday night, though some criticised its length and said at times it verged on lecturing.

Others puzzled over the audience's applause and loud cheering, saying it lent an atmosphere more in keeping with a political rally than a commemoration.

"You can either have a pep rally or a memorial service, you can't have both at the same time," the conservative columnist Michael Gerson told CNN.

But a stream of online messages from Arizonans to news websites begged to differ, countering that the cheering signified unity and hope after a week of tears and raw emotion.

Political historians had nominated the service as an opportunity for Mr Obama to reinvigorate his political fortunes in similar fashion to President Bill Clinton's rebound in popularity following his address to the nation after the Oklahoma bombing in 1995.

One of the biggest cheers from the 27,000-strong gathering came when Mr Obama departed from his prepared text to reveal that the critically injured Democrat congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords had opened her eyes for the first time since the shooting shortly before the memorial service began.

Many of those wounded in the shooting, and their families, described the President's address as inspirational.

Mr Obama, who aides said had written most of the speech himself, carefully acknowledged the increasingly polarised nature of political debate in the US, criticised by many as verging on inciting violence. A graphic used by the former Republican vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin that marked the electorates of Democrat opponents with gun sights, was widely condemned as dangerous.

But Mr Obama cautioned the packed sports stadium at the Tucson campus of the University of Arizona: ''The truth is that none of us can know exactly what triggered this vicious attack.''

The remarks contrasted with a videotaped address released earlier in the day by Mrs Palin in which she described as ''reprehensible'' those who linked her campaign to the shooting.

In her first public comments since the tragedy, Ms Palin cited Ronald Reagan's proposition that individuals, not society, were to blame for ''acts of monstrous criminality''.

But she caused angst when she suggested that ''media and pundits … should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only to incite the hatred and violence that they purport to condemn''.

The term ''blood libel'' is typically used to refer to a centuries-old anti-Semitic myth that Jews murdered Christian children to use their blood in religious rituals.

During the commemoration, President Obama was seated next to 20-year-old Daniel Hernandez, a nurse who recently joined Ms Giffords's staff as a volunteer and was credited with saving her life by stemming her blood loss and holding her upright so she did not choke immediately after the attack.

Though Mr Hernandez denied being a hero, Mr Obama insisted that he was - along with others who responded to the rampage - prompting a standing ovation.




