AFP

The US lawmaker shot in the head in Arizona has made a "major leap forward" in her recovery, opening her eyes spontaneously and moving her legs and arms when asked, doctors say.

Democratic congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords opened her eyes for the first time minutes after President Barack Obama visited her on Wednesday and is becoming increasingly aware of her surroundings and able to respond.

"This is a major leap forward, this is a major milestone, and we're hoping that she crosses through many more," neurosurgeon Michael Lemole said on Thursday of Giffords, who remains in critical condition after Saturday's shooting.

Doctors hope to get Giffords sitting up within days, they said, adding that she has been able to keep her eyes open for up to 15 minutes, at one point responding to the sound of the television in her room.

"Miracles happen every day. In medicine we like to very much attribute them to either what we do or others do around us. A lot of medicine is outside our control," he said, when asked whether the recovery was miraculous.

"We're wise to acknowledge miracles," he said.

Peter Rhee, head of trauma at Tucson's University Medical Center, said he was impressed by Giffords's ability to respond to commands when she was moved so that her legs were dangling over the side of the bed.

"She is able to move both of those legs to command. And that's huge," he told reporters at the latest daily update on the condition of Giffords and others who remain in hospital following the shooting.

Six people died, including a federal judge and a nine-year-old girl, and 14 were wounded in the burst of violence outside a Tucson supermarket, where Giffords was holding a public even with her constituents.

Giffords, 40, survived despite being shot through the head from point-blank range by a bullet from the Glock 9mm of alleged gunman Jared Loughner, a 22-year-old local resident.

Obama visited the lawmaker in hospital on Wednesday during a visit to Tucson to address a public memorial service for the victims of the shooting.


