AFP

The medical condition of the US congresswoman shot in the head in Arizona last week has improved from "critical," to "serious," officials at the hospital where she is being treated said.

US Representative Gabrielle Giffords has been upgraded to serious condition from critical because she is no longer on a ventilator," the University Medical Center in Tucson said in a statement.

"The congresswoman continues to do well. She is breathing on her own," the hospital statement added.

The hospital said three other patients from last week's shooting remain in hospital and are in good condition, and that a full press briefing on their health of all three shooting victims still being treated there would be held on Monday.

Earlier on Sunday, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand told US television that she had visited with Giffords the previous day and found her "doing great" and "making progress every day."

Giffords is "using both sides of her body. She's able to breathe on her own. She's able to open her eyes and to show people she understands what she's hearing and seeing," Gillibrand told NBC's Meet The Press program.

"It's an extraordinary amount of progress for a woman who sustained such a horrific injury," she added.

The 40-year-old Giffords has survived despite being shot through the head from point-blank range a week ago and remains in critical condition. With Gillibrand in the hospital room, Giffords opened her eyes for the first time on Wednesday, minutes after President Barack Obama visited her.

"She is doing great, and I talked to her husband, Mark, last night. And she is making progress," Gillibrand said.

"If there's anyone in the world that will recover fully from this kind of crime and just unbelievable injury, it's her. She's got courage. She's got drive. She's got spirit. And I really think her courage is inspiring to all of us right now."

Six people died in the shooting, including a federal judge and a nine-year-old girl, and 14 were wounded in the burst of violence a week ago outside a Tucson supermarket, where Giffords was holding a public event with her constituents.

Accused gunman Jared Loughner, a 22-year-old local resident, is in custody and has been charged with murder and the attempted assassination of a US lawmaker.


