TERESOPOLIS, Brazil:  News of the "miracle" rescue of a six-month-old Brazilian boy has provided a rare moment of hope as the death toll from this week's devastating landslides continued to rise.

Nicolas Barreto was reportedly at his grandmother's home in the hilltop town of Nova Friburgo, one of the worst-affected settlements, when a cascade of earth and debris swallowed the area on Wednesday.

He and his father were presumed dead. Almost 15 hours later, however, elated Brazilian firefighters  discovered Nicolas and Wellington da Silva Guimaraes alive.

The child and his 25-year-old father were cocooned in an underground air pocket and protected by the collapsed concrete roof. Mr Guimaraes wrapped himself around his son during their ordeal.

"We can consider this a miracle," one of the rescuers said as Nicolas was rushed to hospital.

Ademilson Barreto Guimaraes, the baby's grandfather, wept as Nicolas was hauled from the destruction  about 8.30pm. "There's no way of explaining this. It really is a miracle," he said.

More than 500 people have died, and the number is expected to rise  as rescue workers continue to pull bodies from the muddy earth.

The force of the landslides meant there were few survivors; most victims were buried alive as they slept.

"It's ugly, really ugly," said Vicente Luiz Florente, a builder whose brother was buried under rocks in the Campo Grande favela in Teresopolis, and has yet to be found. "This was a community — now all you can see is rocks."

Nicolas's family did not escape the carnage. Hours after he was found alive, his mother and grandmother were reported dead.

Brazil's most deadly natural disaster may worsen as heavy  rain in coming weeks threatens to cause more mudslides and hinder rescue efforts.

Petropolis, Teresopolis and Nova Friburgo, cities in the mountainous area about 65 kilometres  north of Rio de Janeiro, were the hardest hit  as heavy rain sent earth and rocks rolling down hillside communities and swollen rivers swept away houses. A cold front stationed in the region and a weather system bringing humidity from the Amazon will continue to produce persistent rain, Brazil's Agriculture Ministry said.

Guardian News & Media and agencies


