AAP

Treasurer Wayne Swan says flooding across eastern Australia is likely to be the most costly natural disaster in the nation's history.

Mr Swan's comment came as Prime Minister Julia Gillard told reporters during a visit to flood-hit Echuca, in northwest Victoria, the government would consider changes to insurance regulation to minimise the grey areas in flood policies.

As the clean-up begins in earnest in southern Queensland and northern Victoria faces rising river levels, attention is turning to the economic impact.

"What I can say ... is that it looks like this is possibly going to be, in economic terms, the largest natural disaster in our history," Mr Swan told ABC Radio.

Mr Swan said the federal government would be up for a "very substantial amount of money" under natural disaster relief arrangements with the states.

"It will involve billions of dollars of commonwealth money and also state government money and there's going to be impacts on local governments as well," Mr Swan said.

"It will be a question of years as we go through the rebuilding process."

The flooding would also impact on the cost of living in terms of higher food prices, he said.

Asked on Macquarie Radio whether the federal government would consider dipping into the Future Fund, Attorney-General Robert McClelland said it had not been discussed.

But he pointed out the damage caused by the floods was "unprecedented".

Mr Swan and Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten met with insurance company bosses last week to discuss the definition of "flood" and differences in policies between insurers.

Ms Gillard said she supported insurance reform and expected companies to show the same generosity of spirit the Australian people had shown throughout the floods crisis.

"What I would certainly say to them is they should be doing the right thing by the people of Australia at a time as tough as this," she said.

"My message to the insurance industry would be to show the same kind of spirit the people of Australia have been showing as they've really pulled together in these very difficult circumstances."

Ms Gillard spoke with flood evacuees in relief centres on Monday as she toured the Echuca area.

"It makes me feel both privileged and humbled," she said.


