AAP

Queensland Premier Anna Bligh says the death toll in her state's flooding has reached 13 after a body was found in a field near Grantham.

Authorities were breathing a sigh of relief on Thursday morning as the Brisbane River peaked at 4.46 metres - below its projected level and a metre below the devastating 1974 flood peak.

However, more than 15,000 residential and commercial properties have been affected by significant flooding.

More than 115,000 Brisbane and Ipswich homes are without electricity supply and in many cases won't be reconnected for several days.

"Queensland is reeling this morning from the worst natural disaster in our history and possibly in the history of our nation," she told reporters in Brisbane.

"As we look across our state we've seen three-quarters of our state having experienced the devastation of raging floodwaters and we now face a reconstruction task of post-war proportions.

"That is how we are seeing it and we have steely determination to overcome what we have seen in the last three weeks."

While water had receded in the Toowoomba and Lockyer Valley areas, the flood devastation was now becoming clearer, Ms Bligh said.

"This is a valley that has been completely and ultimately devastated.

"There are whole towns that are now unrecognisable."

Ms Bligh said a body had been found in a field on a farm near Grantham, raising the death toll to 13 so far.

"Our condolences go to the family of another victim of the terrible floods in the Lockyer Valley," she said.

State disaster co-ordinator Ian Stewart said there would be more bad news to come about flood victims.

"We've got to brace ourselves for more bad news," he said.

"That is because we are now getting emergency services personnel and police into some of the more remote areas of the Lockyer Valley where we haven't been able to get to until now.

"I am sure we, as we go through this process of meticulously searching some of the very isolated areas and remote farm houses, buildings that have collapsed and waterways, unfortunately will receive more bad news in relation to victims of this very tragic event."

He said he had no further details about the latest victim.

Ms Bligh said that in the Goondiwindi area, river levels were continuing to rise and authorities were "very, very concerned".

"It is a town headed for its record ever flood and it is likely to peak overnight," she said.

"We are keeping a very careful watch on the levee banks in Goondiwindi."

Condamine is another community where river levels are rising.

"It may not reach quite the peak it did last week but will be in that vicinity, either tomorrow or on the weekend," Ms Bligh said.

Water levels in all other systems were falling, Ms Bligh said.

walkway, usually under Brisbane's Kangaroo Point cliffs, wash down the river.

"There will be other experiences just like it - in neighbourhoods, where people watch their parks, their swings, their recreational spaces, possibly their schools all devastated," she said.

"So, there's a lot of grief and there's a lot of pain, not only here in the southeast but in other parts of Queensland today."

Ms Bligh said there were major supply problems in Rockhampton where river levels were not falling at the predicted rate.

As a consequence, it could be the weekend or even later before roads in the area could be re-opened.

Air force planes would continue to deliver supplies to communities north of Rockhampton.

"The cut in the Bruce Highway is causing a great deal of problems and concern with supplies into those parts of Queensland," Ms Bligh said.

"However, we did have planes go into Townsville and to Bundaberg last night and this morning, and they will continue those supplies for as long as possible."

Ms Bligh said 11,900 homes in Brisbane had experienced flooding across the entire property, while a further 14,700 homes had been partially inundated.

Around 4500 commercial businesses had been inundated, with 2500 having some partial flooding.

"There will be some people who will be able to get in in the next couple of days, assess the damage, clean up and get back into their homes within a week," the premier said.

"But there will be others ... who will go into their homes and find their homes will never be habitable again."

She said some people would require temporary accommodation.

"When I say temporary, it could be for months," she said.

Ms Bligh broke down as she spoke about Queenslanders "weeping" for losses from the flood and "grieving" for family and friends as the challenge of recovery begins.

"I want us to remember who we are," she said.

"We are Queenslanders, we are the people we breed tough north of the border.

"We're the ones that they knock down and we get up again."

The recent weather was continuing to break the hearts of Queenslanders but not their will, Ms Bligh said.

"And in the coming weeks, and in the coming months, we are going to prove that beyond any doubt.

"Together we can pull through this and that's what I'm determined to do and with your help we can achieve that."

Ms Bligh said there were now 70 towns and cities across Queensland affected by flooding "either because they have been inundated themselves or they have been cut off from major supply lines and isolated for weeks".

She said major roads and rail lines remained cut.

"We now have to add in the 2.5 million people who call southeast Queensland home to that number."

People on the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast would feel the impact of the floods through cancelled medical appointments in the Brisbane CBD.

"So, the ripple effect of this event cannot be underestimated."

Ms Bligh said there had been an avalanche of people wanting to volunteer for the clean-up both in Brisbane and across Queensland.

"When an event like this happens, you see the best come out in people," she said.

"We've seen it already on our streets, people out there helping their neighbours, doing everything they can."

Ms Bligh said the recovery effort would need "every single person to be part of this".

She encouraged those people wanting to volunteer to register online with Volunteering Queensland so the clean-up was done in an organised way.

"We'd also encourage people to please help your neighbours, your family and your friends first.

"If we help the people we know around us then that will make the task for the authorities that much easier."


