AAP

An emotional Premier Anna Bligh has called on Queenslanders to show their fighting spirit to rebuild the state following the devastating flood crisis.

Three-quarters of the state have been hit by floods over three weeks, claiming 13 lives and wreaking havoc on property, infrastructure and the economy, and on Wednesday the surging waters poured into the capital Brisbane.

Ms Bligh said on Thursday there were now 70 towns and cities across Queensland affected by flooding, "either because they have been inundated themselves or they have been cut off from major supply lines and isolated for weeks".

"We now have to add in the 2.5 million people who call southeast Queensland home to that number."

But she assured residents of every flood-hit town in Queensland, no matter how small, they would not be forgotten.

"As we weep for what we have lost, and as we grieve for family and friends and we confront the challenge that is before us, I want us to remember who we are," she told reporters in Brisbane.

"We are Queenslanders.

"We're the people that they breed tough, north of the border.

"We're the ones that they knock down, and we get up again."

The Brisbane River peaked about a metre lower than the expected 4.45 metres at 4am (AEST) on Thursday, offering a small reprieve, but not enough to spare low-lying suburbs along its banks.

The river level was a metre short of the 1974 peak of 5.45 metres, which authorities had feared would be matched by the latest tide of destruction.

On Thursday morning, the CBD was a virtual ghost town, with businesses shut and sandbagged, dozens of major roads closed and bridges across the river closed.

Ms Bligh said 11,900 homes in Brisbane had been completely flooded, while a further 14,700 homes had been partially inundated. Around 4500 commercial businesses had been inundated, with 2500 having some partial flooding.

She said the true extent of the damage in the Toowoomba and Lockyer Valley areas was just now becoming clearer, as the waters receded.

"This is a valley that has been completely and ultimately devastated. There are whole towns that are now unrecognisable."

Authorities expect to find more bodies as they reach some of the more remote areas of the Lockyer Valley.

"I am sure we, as we go through this process of meticulously searching some of the very isolated areas and remote farm houses, buildings that have collapsed and waterways, unfortunately will receive more bad news in relation to victims of this very tragic event," state disaster co-ordinator Ian Stewart told reporters at the briefing.

Ms Bligh said authorities were looking at recovery, but she warned the flood crisis was not over, with towns like Goondiwindi and Condamine yet to face flood peaks.

"Queensland is reeling this morning from the worst natural disaster in our history and possibly in the history of our nation," she said.

"As we look across our state we've seen three-quarters of our state having experienced the devastation of raging floodwaters and we now face a reconstruction task of post-war proportions.

"That is how we are seeing it, and we have steely determination to overcome what we have seen in the last three weeks."

Recovery co-ordinator Major General Mick Slater said it would be a long road back to normality for Queensland.

"We have the capacity in Australia to do this, but we can't do it all at once, and it's going to take a long time," he told the Seven Network on Thursday.

"Yes, it is a massive job, and we've already begun the task ahead of us.

"While the crisis is still going on down here in southeast Queensland, we are already up and engaging with the rural communities where the water has started to subside."

Ms Bligh said the disaster would leave many people homeless.

"There will be some people who will be able to get in in the next couple of days, assess the damage, clean up and get back into their homes within a week," the premier said.

"But there will be others ... who will go into their homes and find their homes will never be habitable again."

She said some people would require temporary accommodation.

Ms Bligh said there had been an avalanche of people wanting to volunteer for the clean-up both in Brisbane and across Queensland.

"When an event like this happens, you see the best come out in people," she said.

Ms Bligh said the recovery effort would need "every single person to be part of this".

She encouraged people wanting to volunteer to register online with Volunteering Queensland, so the clean-up was done in an organised way.

The recent weather was continuing to break the hearts of Queenslanders, but not their will, she said.

"Together we can pull through this, and that's what I'm determined to do and with your help we can achieve that."


