The death toll in the Queensland floods has risen to 13, as authorities estimate it will take two years and billions of dollars to repair the damage from the worst disaster in a century.

The death of a 50-year-old man in Karrabin, who was found in his vehicle submerged in a creek about 11.15 yesterday, was not added to the toll as police were still investigating if it was related to the floods, a spokeswoman said this morning.

In the past 24 hours till 5am, 7000 calls were made to the SES throughout the state, with 3000 calls from Brisbane and 630 from Ipswich, a Department of Community Safety spokeswoman said.

There are now more than 7000 people registered for evacuation with the Red Cross.

The number of people missing in the Toowoomba-Lockyer Valley area has been revised down to 43, with Queensland Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson saying there were still grave concerns for nine people.

But police had been heartened by the news two people in the same area  who were feared dead had been rescued after being swept away in  raging flood waters.

"Both of those people were literally swept away by flood waters and there was every reason to believe that they had lost their lives," Mr Atkinson said.

"Its wonderful news and really one can only describe it as a miracle based on the circumstances of which they went missing." He said details of the two separate incidents would be released later today.

The grim news of the latest deaths was announced by Queensland Premier Anna Bligh after the bodies of two men were discovered in the Lockyer Valley this afternoon, one at a home at Grantham and another in a creek at Lyons Bridge.

"It's tragic news that we've had another two deaths... I don't believe that's the end of that kind of news," Ms Bligh said.

"To the families of the two men whose bodies were found this afternoon, the  thoughts of all Queenslanders are with you."

Deputy Police Commissioner Ian Stewart said recovery teams were searching buildings "completely destroyed" by floodwaters, and combing trees, creeks and cars for bodies.

"Our hope is that we actually might find some survivors but the chances of that are quite remote," he said.

'I saw arms, hands, grey hair, and that was it'

A distraught Grantham local said he thought bodies he saw being thrown about in turbulent floodwaters were trying to swim, until he realised they were dead.

"You saw arms, hands, grey hair, and that was it, by the time you knelt down you realise they're not swimming, they are already gone," Martin Warburton told the Seven network.

"I can't describe it, I just can't describe it."

The married father of a young son spent 12 terrifying hours on a roof awaiting rescue on Tuesday night.

"After going through that and seeing bodies float past, thinking that they are trying to swim, you know, because the water was that turbulent it was just throwing them around," he said.

"Then you bend down to try and grab them and then you realise that they are already gone."

Mr Warburton said he had seen two bodies float past after he took refuge on his roof, but he couldn't say if he knew them.

"It was basically just get out, just leave everything..." he said.

"At first I thought I was all right. Then you started seeing houses get ripped off their stumps and washed down the road...

"Then they were slamming into the side of the building and the building was starting to shake."

Whole Brisbane suburbs at risk

Ms Bligh said it was a sign "of things to come" in the days  ahead.

The Bureau of Meteorology has revised down its prediction for the surging Brisbane River, with water levels now expected to peak at 5.2 metres tomorrow morning.

The new prediction is almost a metre above the 4.3m level the river reached this afternoon, but is just below that of the devastating 1974 flood. Yesterday, forecasters warned of a potential peak of 5.5 metres.

Thousands of homes will be inundated when the high tide peaks at 4am tomorrow.

Ms Bligh tonight described the revised forecast as a "slight reprieve" but said the city would still be devastated by the flood peak.She said anywhere between 20,000 and 30,000 people would be affected by flooding.

Waters were expected to remain high for 12-18 hours once the peak was  reached. Ms Bligh warned local residents to stay off roads if possible.

"This incident is not a tourist event - this is a deeply serious  natural disaster," she said. "Stay in your homes - do not travel unless  it is absolutely necessary."

Major flooding is also expected across the border in NSW today. With the Clarence River expected to peak at seven metres,  evacuations are under way in Grafton.

Brisbane residents have been warned that complete suburbs could go  under, as floodwaters begin to inundate riverside homes, and the pontoon  of the award-winning Drift Cafe on the river floats away.

Flooding has affected the Island barge and the Moggill ferry and  authorities are are considering destruction and sinking of both vessels.  Brisbane Riverwalk is also set to be demolished amid fears it could break away and become a dangerous missile in the surging Brisbane River.

Some enterprising residents have been heading to the golf course at  St Lucia,  in Brisbane's west, and shovelling sand from the course's  sandtraps into bags to protect their homes from flooding.

Brisbane Lord Mayor Campbell Newman said new flood modelling indicated 19,700 residential properties and 3500 commercial premises in 2100 streets were likely to be flooded in the city.

And the 6500 homes on the first flood warning list, issued yesterday, are likely to be severely affected.

"For the low-lying areas, for the ones that were on the original  list, those properties are going to go under to a significant extent,"  Cr Newman told the Seven network this morning.

"In 1974 there were properties in Yeronga, for example, that went completely under. That's what we’re staring at."

About 127,000 flood-affected Queensland residents are without power, and power company Energex admitted it was unlikely many would be reconnected before the weekend.

Energex began cutting power this morning to homes and businesses in the Brisbane CBD. A number of buildings in the city's inner-city suburbs are also currently without power, as are residents in nearby Ipswich. Homes in the Lockyer Valley, which was inundated by floodwaters earlier in the week, are also still without electricity.

As the rain of recent days gave way to blue skies in Brisbane, Ms  Bligh told Sky News the break in the weather would allow rescue workers  to search for the missing, which includes entire families.

She said it would be a "gruesome day for rescue workers and a heartbreaking day for families" who are still missing loved ones.

"I think we will all be shocked by what they will find," she said.

Five Brisbane evacuation centres have now been established, with two bigger ones at the RNA Showgrounds  and Queensland Sport and Athletic Centre (formerly ANZ Stadium and QEII  Stadium) and smaller ones in the city's south-west at the St Catherine  Anglican Church and Salvation Army Church in Middle Park and the Good  New  Lutheran Church in Jamboree Heights.

Floods leave a massive damage bill

Roads, sewage systems and parks are among the assets destroyed as the state experiences the worst flooding in more than a century.

Local Government Association of Queensland chief executive Greg Hallam said even with an organised approach, restoring the state's infrastructure would take a couple of years because some of it had been wiped out.

Mr Hallam said the biggest damage will be to the state's roads, with between 70,000km to 90,000km of council roads damaged by floods.

Queensland's sewage system, another local government responsibility, has also been badly damaged. "A lot of projects that were going to be built won't be built in the short term or the next two or three years, simply because all of our efforts will be about restoration," Mr Hallam said.

Queensland Treasurer Andrew Fraser said he expected the flood damage bill to cost billions of dollars, while Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin said a hit to the economy of 1 per cent was "not out of the question".

Chinchilla braces for second round of flooding

The residents of Chinchilla are preparing for a worse flood than the one they   endured last month, with the water forecast to peak at 7.8 metres. They   are now facing the prospect of evacuating from homes to which they had   only just returned.

Mayor of the Western Downs Regional Council, Ray Brown, said more evacuations  had been carried out, with 36 houses and 30 businesses under water just before  noon today.

"The flood peak for Charley's Creek has been revised up to 7.8 metres which  is much bigger than the flood we had 10 days ago," he said.

"I don't know of any other area in Australia that's had two complete town  evacuations inside 10 days, so you can see why we have a lot of issues going at  the moment."

Residents have also been cautioned to boil water for at least three minutes after e-coli bacteria was found in the water supply.

Numbers grow in evacuation centres

Ms Bligh said 3585 people have been forced to take shelter in 57 evacuation  centres across the state as floodwaters continue to rise.

Thousands more  have fled their homes and are sheltering with family and friends on higher  ground.

"This [3585] is an extraordinary number of people," Ms Bligh told  reporters in Brisbane.

"These are the people who  have formally registered [and] there will be thousands more who have gone to  relatives and friends."

Of those in evacuation centres about 1500 are in  Ipswich and 600 are in Brisbane.

"We expect that number to grow as they  rivers start to swell and peak this afternoon and overnight," Ms Bligh  said.

Temporary morgues are being set up west of Brisbane as health authorities prepare for the arrival of those killed.

--------------Citizen journalism: Send us your flood updates--------------

It is understood the Australian Defence Force is working at Toowoomba Hospital to set up a morgue for at least 20 bodies resulting from Monday's flash flooding.

Hampering flood relief operations were a significant number of people contacting triple-0 for non-life-threatening emergencies, such as moving furniture.

"We simply cannot have our triple-0 lines caught up with people calling for trivial matters," Mr Roberts said.

Ipswich inundated

Earlier this morning, the entire CBD of Ipswich was closed off, while a quarry filled with water collapsed in the town  of Fernvale, flooding homes and stranding hundreds of people.

The rising Bremer River has submerged numerous homes and businesses in Ipswich,  with evacuations centres overflowing, mayor Paul Pisasale said.

The mayor was furious after hearing of several reports of looting taking place in flood-affected areas.

"If I find anybody looting in our city they will be used as flood markers," he said.

The Coles supermarket was inundated to a depth of 2.44  metres, with just the awning and store logo showing above the  floodwaters which continue to rise.

The Bremer River had risen to 18.9 metres at 7.30am this morning, but the expected peak has been revised from 22 to 20.5 metres, 20 centimetres below the 1974 peak of 20.7 metres. At 4pm it was holding steady at 19.4 metres.

However, Ms Bligh said residents should remember the city was a very different place from 1974, with much more development.

Wild torrent carries debris

There are major concerns for safety on the Brisbane River as  debris and boats are whipped along in the churning maelstrom.

The fast-moving currents ripped whole  sections of jetties away, sending them spinning downstream in the  raging torrents.

The water had entirely engulfed the lower promenade at Eagle Street Pier, in the city’s entertainment precinct, flooding dozens of restaurants and threatening many more.

Energex yesterday advised power to low-lying parts of the CBD would be cut from 8.30am, closing many workplaces.

Police have warned against any non-essential travel to the city.

All South East Queensland Water dams were reportedly safe and stable overnight.

Queensland Emergency Services Minister Neil Roberts said Brisbane port would be closed "to all but emergency situations".

- with Daniel Nancarrow and AAP

- 1300 993 191: hotline  for  Toowoomba, Murphy's  Creek, Grantham and Withcott areas.

- Lifeline: 13 11 14 

- Donations can be made over the phone,  online, in the  mail or in person at any  branch of the Bank of Queensland, Commonwealth Bank, Westpac, ANZ, NAB or  Suncorp.

Follow Environment on Twitter 


