AAP

The number of defence force personnel involved in the Queensland flood operation will be doubled to 1200, Prime Minister Julia Gillard says.

"This will be the biggest deployment for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy," Ms Gillard said at Amberley air base west of Brisbane on Friday.

Ms Gillard said, after talks with Defence Minister Stephen Smith and military chiefs, "Now is the right time to dramatically increase the number of defence personnel who are working in Queensland to assist with the Queensland floods."

The prime minister on Friday spoke with ADF personnel at the air base, ahead of a visit to the flood-ravaged Lockyer Valley west of Brisbane.

"It's so important at this time that townships that have been isolated can still get vital supplies," she said.

Ms Gillard said the increased defence presence was vital for the recovery effort.

"There will be a general stream of clean-up work," she said.

"Defence personnel (will be) getting out helping with the mopping, the hosing and the removal of debris and rubbish that needs to happen so communities can start getting back on their feet."

Military aircraft would continue to be involved in transporting supplies, search-and-rescue operations and potentially medical evacuations.

Defence personnel would also be involved in engineering work.

"Those engineers can work alongside Queensland experts to do things like assess the structural integrity of roads, assist with urgent repairs, help vehicles and people get moving through again, and assist with things like creating temporary bridges," Ms Gillard said.

Ms Gillard said defence also would provide specialist services to Queenslanders affected by floods.

That would include psychologists who were used to dealing with people who had been involved in very traumatic incidents.

The prime minister warned there was be a lot to deal with during the coming weeks.

"There's a lot of dirt, a lot of filth, a lot of mess that needs to be cleaned up.

"We've been through some very difficult days and there's still a lot to go through in the weeks and months that lie ahead.

"We'll be giving it 100 per cent, more than 100 per cent to help people in this period."

Ms Gillard, who later on Friday will visit the Lockyer Valley, where the search continues for missing people, said it had been a tough time for everyone involved.

"Our thoughts are really with those people who continue to bear the weight of not knowing what's happened with loved ones," she said.

"People are grieving, I think the nation is grieving with them, and we are all focused on the search effort and answering those questions for people who are still waiting."

Her visit to the flood-ravaged area would also help "maximise the efforts that we're making to assist in the recovery".

The extra defence personnel would be available for "at least a number of weeks".

"And then there will be the recovery effort ... and there will be times that defence will be assisting with that," Ms Gillard said.

To date, Centrelink has provided $35 million in assistance to 27,000 people affected by flooding in Queensland.

The welfare agency's hotline took 20,000 calls on Thursday.


