A MASSIVE airlift of food and other essential supplies is under way  across Queensland after panic buying emptied supermarket shelves in  major towns and cities cut off by floods.

Australia's big supermarket chains called in the army yesterday to move  desperately needed supplies on military planes to isolated areas.

The airlift began as shell-shocked Brisbane residents prepared for what  Premier Anna Bligh called a reconstruction effort of postwar  proportions, in the wake of the city's biggest flood in 36 years.

The Brisbane River peaked early yesterday at 4.46 metres, a metre below  the 1974 peak but high enough to flood or partially flood almost 30,000  homes and 5000  businesses. After rising again to 4.2 metres yesterday  afternoon, it was forecast to drop back to 3.2 metres this morning.

But as floodwaters began to recede in most other disaster areas as well,  the official statewide death toll kept rising, reaching 15 yesterday  with the discovery of more bodies.

Sixty-one people remained unaccounted for, with grave fears held for 12 -  including 11 in the devastated Lockyer Valley community of Murphys  Creek.

An exhausted Ms Bligh broke down as she conducted another of her public  briefings on what has turned into the biggest natural disaster in  Queensland's recorded history.

''As we weep for what we have lost, and as we grieve for family and  friends and we confront the challenge that is before us, I want us to  remember who we are,'' Ms Bligh said, her voice cracking with emotion.

''We are Queenslanders. We're the people that they breed tough, north of  the border. We're the ones that they knock down, and we get up again.''

Three-quarters of the state has been declared a disaster zone. The  Premier said there were now 70 towns and cities affected by flooding,  ''either because they have been inundated themselves or they have been  cut off from major supply lines and isolated for weeks''.

The reconstruction task would be of ''postwar proportions'', she said.  ''That is how we are seeing it and that is the sort of steely  determination that it will require.''

The nation's biggest supermarket chains - Woolworths, Coles and IGA -  yesterday used two giant C17 military planes to help get basic supplies  to parts of the state that have been cut off by the floods.

The planes, loaded with milk, bread, canned and baby food, bottled  water, cleaning products and other basics, left Sydney and Brisbane for  Townsville.

The Australian Defence Force also used C130 planes to get food to  Bundaberg, while the supermarket chains sent a convoy of 15 B-double  trucks early yesterday, with police escort, for Gympie and Hervey Bay.

With floods receding in some areas, authorities began reopening some  major road links north of Brisbane. The Bruce Highway at Gympie reopened  yesterday afternoon, and the highway was  expected to reopen at  Rockhampton about 4pm today.

But other parts of the state and northern New South Wales were still  bracing for more flooding. West of Brisbane, besieged residents of  Dalby, Condamine and Chinchilla were preparing for their homes and  businesses go under for the second time since Christmas.

The Queensland-NSW border town of Goondiwindi was also on tenterhooks  last night, facing a record flood peak of 10.85 metres, just shy of the  11-metre height of its levee banks.

The bodies of three more people who perished in the floods were recovered yesterday.

A 24-year-old man was found dead after being swept down a drain in  Durack in south-west Brisbane, an unidentified man was found drowned in  Myall Creek near Dalby, and the body of another man was found in a field  on a farm in Grantham.

Queensland  Deputy Police Commissioner Ian Stewart said the Brisbane  man's death was preventable after he ignored advice and entered  floodwaters in an effort to check on his father's flooded property.

''This is exactly what we were afraid would happen. It is avoidable and  will be avoidable if people just wait a little while until those areas  are made safe,'' Mr Stewart said.

The full destructive force of the ''inland tsunami'' that surged through  Toowoomba and the Lockyer Valley on Monday began to become apparent  yesterday as the military, emergency services and police patrolled the  area in search of survivors and the dead, and politicians toured  shattered towns littered with debris.

Lockyer Valley Council chief executive Ian Flint  said the region was a  disaster zone. ''You've seen pictures in the past of tsunamis and  cyclones, and certainly it's like all of that,'' Mr Flint told ABC  radio.

''Houses have been washed away, infrastructure has been washed away,  cars, people … the worst possible picture that you can have is  absolutely correct, particularly around the Grantham area.''

Police warned that the death toll would inexorably rise in coming days.  ''We've got to brace ourselves for more bad news,'' Mr Stewart said.  ''That is because we are now getting emergency services personnel and  police into some of the more remote areas of the Lockyer Valley where we  haven't been able to get to until now.''

A team of 120 Australian Defence Force soldiers and 90 SES volunteers  were combing the valley yesterday, searching for signs of life.

In Brisbane, hundreds of people waded, swam, paddled and used boats to  reach their flooded houses. But they realised there was little they  could do until the water recedes, which may not happen until Monday. The  central business district was largely deserted.

Standing on the second-storey balcony of his submerged house in  Fairfield, Luke Opray, 37, said he planned to throw a flood party with  the guests asked to ''bring your own mop''.

Police in boats patrolled flooded areas, checking that people who went into houses were not looters.

Three people were charged with looting on Tuesday after allegedly  trying to steal boats on the Brisbane River,  but nobody was charged  yesterday.

Many suburbs remained cut off last night, and tens of thousands of  people were without power. Police warned that electricity would not be  reconnected to homes until they had been certified safe by   electricians. The number of properties without power was expected to  drop from a peak of 125,000 to 30,000 late tonight.

But most Brisbane businesses were likely to remain closed into next week.

Prime Minister Julia Gillard  said rebuilding effort would require a  huge amount of money, but that it would not derail the  government's  commitment to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13.

''We are going to organise the federal budget so we are meeting the  needs of Queensland in extensive rebuilding, bridge by bridge, road by  road and facility by facility,'' Ms Gillard said.

With RICHARD WILLINGHAM, AAP

 


