AS THE state began the long clean-up, the big wet hit other parts of the country with flooding in parts of NSW, Victoria and Tasmania.

The holiday towns of Yamba and Iluka on the NSW north coast were likely to be cut off until Monday, the State Emergency Service said, and several hundred farmers were stranded in western NSW.

The Yarra River in Melbourne burst its banks and several regional towns in Victoria have been evacuated.

The deluge that battered Victoria has hit a large area of NSW, including Wilcannia, White Cliffs and Menindee.

''That rain that is causing all the mess in Victoria has also cut a swathe through our west,'' a NSW SES spokesman, Phil Campbell, said.

The service received 240 calls for help in Broken Hill, with two additional rescue teams sent to help out local forces.

The SES estimates several hundred properties are stranded and will remain so for at least a few days, depending on the extent of road damage.

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding.

But for some there has been good news. Most of the 650 residents of Boggabilla, near the Queensland border, had left by the time the Macintyre River peaked at 12.6 metres at midday on Friday.

''It wasn't as much [of a peak] as we thought,'' Mr Campbell said. ''Twenty centimetres doesn't sound like much but in these flood-affected areas it really is.''

Thirty per cent of the town was submerged, swamping backyards and a caravan park.

''But most of the water went under the houses and not into them,'' Mr Campbell said.

Only a handful of the 200 residents in the nearby town of Toomelah failed to move to higher ground, and the SES said a number of properties had been cut off by flood.

''They could remain like that for a couple of days, maybe longer,'' Mr Campbell said.

Nearby in the Queensland-NSW border town of Goondiwindi, authorities were increasingly confident the town would emerge unscathed from the biggest flood in its history.

The Bureau of Meteorology has predicted a peak of 10.85 metres or higher, slightly below the town's 11-metre levee. However the mayor, Graeme Scheu, said the council believed the river height would fall short of its expected peak.

''We're relatively confident that it won't reach that 10.85 mark and even more confident that it won't go above the 11 metres,'' he said. Residents who had been evacuated from low-lying areas were now returning home but the town's nursing home will remain closed until Monday as a precaution.

''The community is generally pretty happy, most people think it has been a successful exercise,'' Cr Scheu said.

The situation is worse on the north coast of NSW where the swollen Clarence River has stranded 6000 people in the downstream towns of Iluka, Yamba and Maclean.

''We have been running supplies to them by flood boat - bread, milk and mail,'' Mr Campbell said.

''Sunday is a traditional holiday changeover day in those towns but not this weekend,'' he said. ''It may be Monday or Tuesday before full access is restored to Yamba and Iluka.''

Driving rain caused flash flooding across Melbourne, with cars stuck in deep water in the north of the city. Motorists said the walking track beside the river had been completely swamped.

Eighty Melbourne homes and a popular pub in the city's west were in danger of inundation as the lower reaches of the Maribyrnong River was expected to flood late yesterday, the State Emergency Service said.

A SES spokesman, Scott Hilditch, said 85 millimetres of rain fell on the upper reaches of the Werribee River yesterday, which was coursing down it and the Maribyrnong. But regional Victoria was hit harder, with flood warnings issued for towns along the Loddon, Avoca and Campaspe rivers.

Many flood stricken-towns across central and northern Victoria have received their entire summer rainfall average in just five days, the Bureau of Meteorology said. The floodwater was expected to peak overnight.

In Tasmania, a build-up of groundwater in hills behind the Bass Strait coast sent flash floods into homes and businesses at Railton, Penguin and Cooee in the north-east, the State Emergency Service said. Some hospital and aged-care facilities were evacuated as a precaution and coastal communities including Binalong Bay and St Helens were isolated for a second day.

Bridges were inundated and many of the state's northern roads were listed by police as cut, or closed as dangerous. The Premier, David Bartlett, said the main cost of the flooding would be in infrastructure repair.

''The situation in Tasmania is having a big impact on many families, homes and businesses,'' Mr Bartlett said. ''But it is nowhere near the scale of the tragedy elsewhere in Queensland and the rest of Australia.''

with Andrew Darby, Evan Schwarten and agencies

 


