AAP

Drenching rains have stranded several hundred farmers in western NSW, while people in the state's north breathed a sigh of relief.

The deluge that battered Victoria has hit a large area of NSW, including Wilcannia, White Cliffs and Menindee.

"That rain that is causing all the mess in Victoria has also cut a swathe through our west," State Emergency Service (SES) spokesman Phil Campbell said.

The SES received 240 calls for help in Broken Hill, with two additional rescue teams sent to help out local forces.

"It's flash flooding, mostly leaking roofs, minor property damage," Mr Campbell said.

"However, a lot of rural properties are now isolated out there. There are a lot of farmers in that part of the state."

The SES estimates several hundred properties are stranded and will remain so for at least a few days, depending on the extent of road damage.

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding.

But for some there has been good news.

Most of the 650 residents of Boggabilla, near the Queensland border, had been evacuated by the time the Macintyre River peaked at 12.6 metres at midday on Friday.

"It wasn't as much (of a peak) as we thought," Mr Campbell said.

"Twenty centimetres doesn't sound like much but in these flood-affected areas it really is."

Thirty per cent of the town was submerged, swamping backyards and a caravan park.

"But most of the water went under the houses and not into them," Mr Campbell said.

Only a handful of the 200 residents in the nearby town of Toomelah failed to move to higher ground, and the SES said a number of properties had been cut off by floodwater.

"They could remain like that for a couple of days, maybe longer," Mr Campbell said.

The situation is worse on the north coast of NSW where the swollen Clarence River has stranded 6000 people in the downstream towns of Iluka, Yamba and Maclean.

"We have been running supplies to them by flood boat - bread, milk and mail," Mr Campbell said.

"We expect it will be two more days in most cases. We are hoping access will be restored to Maclean tomorrow and other places further downstream in the next day or so."


