AS THE massive clean-up begins in Brisbane and the search for bodies  continues in the Lockyer Valley, authorities face a long-term battle to rebuild  Queensland.

The state has turned to the grim task of clean-up and reconstruction in the  wake of the devastating floods, and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh warned that  recovery would be an arduous and painful process.

''I hope and pray that mother nature is leaving us alone to get on with the  job of cleaning up and recovering from this event,'' she said.

''We all need to be very patient, which is part of getting people back on  their feet, but I do understand. Inevitably, we will see a lot of pain and  grief.''

Ms Bligh spelt out the extent of the carnage in the state yesterday: 86  cities and towns affected, 4436 people currently sheltering in 50 evacuation  centres and 7500 registered as out of their homes; more than 26,000 homes  flood-damaged in Brisbane, with 11,900 completely flooded and 14,700 partially  flooded; and 3000 businesses affected. Some towns and Brisbane suburbs remain  cut off, and it may be next week before the city centre returns to normal.

Prime Minister Julia Gillard yesterday doubled the Australian Defence Force  deployment helping with the clean-up to 1200, in the biggest Australia-based  soldier deployment for a natural disaster since cyclone Tracy in 1974.

The death toll has risen to 16, after the discovery yesterday of a woman's  body near Grantham in the Lockyer Valley. There are 53 people unaccounted for in  Toowoomba and the valley, including 12 for whom police hold grave fears.

''Our thoughts are really with those people who continue to bear the weight  of not knowing what's happened with loved ones,'' Ms Gillard said.

Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson said crews were starting to sort through the  huge piles of debris that had been left scattered throughout the Lockyer Valley,  but it was possible some bodies might never be found.

Queensland Emergency Services Minister Neil Roberts said the search was  complex and difficult, illustrated by the discovery of one body 80 kilometres  downstream from where the person went missing. The state's Coroner said it might  be months before the bodies of those killed in the flash flood were released for  burial.

Ms Bligh spent much of yesterday in Grantham, the epicentre of the area being  searched. ''What I saw can only compare to a war zone or perhaps a cyclonic  hurricane,'' she said.

As the clean-up began in earnest in Brisbane, with thousands of volunteers  descending on the city to help, the Queensland government yesterday warned  insurance companies to meet their obligations to victims in full. Queensland  Treasurer Andrew Fraser and federal Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten met  insurers in Brisbane.

''We want to make sure they don't cut corners and live up to their  obligations despite the pressure on them,'' Mr Fraser said.

Brisbane lord mayor Campbell Newman said the flood damaged one of Brisbane's  major arterial roads so badly it risked falling into the Brisbane River.

Coronation Drive, which connects the central business district to the western  suburbs, remains closed due to structural concerns, causing traffic gridlock in  the city.

''While our priority is opening roads and infrastructure, the clean-up  operation has only just begun and will take many months,'' Mr Newman said.

Skips will be placed in Brisbane streets and kerbside collections will begin  in the coming days. A minesweeper has been requested from the defence force to  comb Moreton Bay for debris washed down the river.

There are growing fears that a shortage of electricians means it could take  weeks for flooded homes to be assessed and have power returned. Energex said it  had restored power to 170,000 premises but power was still cut to 66,000  properties. Thousands of people will have to call in specialists before turning  on any gas or electrical appliances, with Ms Bligh estimating the process will  be lengthy.

''These are houses that have been inundated right up to their rooftops, it  could be weeks,'' she said. ''Some of these houses will have to be demolished,  so they won't be getting supply back on until there's a new house there.''

Support was growing for a royal commission. Ms Bligh has committed to a  formal review, but recovery and reconstruction were the immediate  priorities.

The review would examine ''what can we learn from it, what did we do very  well, where did we make mistakes, what can we do better next time'', she said.  ''We'll certainly be giving thought over the coming days to the best mechanism  to do that.

''But right now we are still getting basic essentials - clean water,  electricity and food - to people. Until that job is done that's going to be my  No. 1 focus.''

Mail services in Queensland are slowly returning to normal, with the recent  reopening of many of the state's roads, and Australia Post yesterday confirmed  that it would be using sea and air transport to manage the backlog of mail which  has built up during the crisis.

While the reopening of the Bruce Highway north of Gympie was a ''significant  improvement'' for erratic food supplies to northern Queensland, supplies of  milk, beer and chicken are still expected to be restricted in the flood zone.  Truck convoys have passed west to Dalby and Toowoomba and yesterday made it  north to Mackay.

Police arrested 10 people for looting. ''Unfortunately there is a minority of  despicable individuals out there doing all they can to take advantage of this  terrible situation,'' Emergency Management Queensland spokesman Warren Bridson  said.

During times of crisis, the maximum penalty for looting increases from five  to 10 years' jail. One alleged looter was resuscitated by police after diving  into the Brisbane River to try to evade them. A man and woman were arrested  after police intercepted their dinghy allegedly filled with stolen items.

With AAP


