AAP

Aboriginal elders are helping authorities encourage residents to leave two NSW towns near the Queensland border threatened by record floods.

The mostly indigenous towns of Boggabilla (650 residents) and Toomelah (200 residents) are expected to be inundated by the Macintyre River, which is predicted to peak at 3am (AEDT) on Friday.

The peak has been revised upwards from 12.5 metres to a record 12.8 metres.

State Emergency Service (SES) spokesman Phil Campbell said most people had already left their homes but the SES was persuading the remaining several hundred to evacuate.

"(The peak) is equivalent to the record flood of 1976 so we're looking at the highest ever flood if this does come to pass," Mr Campbell told AAP.

"We did take some indigenous leaders up in a helicopter to show them the extent of the floodwaters and to encourage (them) ... to encourage local people to leave."

Mr Campbell said residents had been asked to stay with family or friends or at the accommodation arranged by the department of community services in Moree, 120km to the south.

Police have reassured residents of Boggabilla and Toomelah that their property and belongings will be protected while they are away from their homes.

"Anything that can be salvaged will be protected," Local Area Commander Bob Barnett said.

"We are urging residents to rest assured, stay safe and not return prematurely for fear of your property."

He also asked motorists not to return while the area was flooded.

"We are pleading with the public not to make the job harder for the emergency services in the area by putting yourself into harm's way."

Across the state, 1400 people have been asked to evacuate while 6900 residents are isolated by floodwater and stranded on their properties or in holiday accommodation.

However, the flood situation near Grafton, on the north coast, has improved.

The Pacific Highway south of Grafton has reopened to all traffic but remains closed to the north of the city.

The highway was closed in both directions on Tuesday when it was blocked by floodwaters from the Clarence River.

Access to the nearby towns of Brushgrove and Cowper, which have been evacuated, could be restored in the next couple of days, the SES says.

Further north, access to the townships of Bonalbo and Urbenville has been restored and residents are now returning to their homes.

"The situation is improving, particularly in the north coast of NSW," Mr Campbell said.

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding.


