AAP

The number of people missing in Toowoomba and the Lockyer Valley following flash flooding has been revised down, Queensland's Emergency Services Minister Neil Roberts says.

"We now have grave fears for nine people, so that has been revised down thankfully," Mr Roberts told reporters in Brisbane.

"The total missing has been revised down to 51.

"So thankfully people are being found and identified as being okay - which is good news."

Authorities had previously held grave fears for 18 people with 90 thought to be missing.

The death toll from Queensland's most serious natural disaster still stands at 12.

Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson said two people who had been seen swept away in the Lockyer Valley floodwaters had survived.

"That's a small piece of wonderful news," he said.

"I can only describe it as a miracle."

He said details of the two separate incidents would be released later on Wednesday.

Mr Atkinson said the investigation of the 12 Lockyer Valley deaths would be conducted by six homicide squad detectives in order to free up local police officers for other work.

He said the involvement of the detectives was not because there was any suspicious circumstances.

Mr Atkinson said police resources were being stretched.

"I don't know whether there's been a time in Queensland's history where there has been so much going on at the same time," he said.

Mr Roberts said emergency services were investigating how flooding had affected the Island barge and the Moggill ferry.

They are considering destruction and sinking of both vessels.

The minister confirmed that the Centenary Highway southbound is now closed.

"Right across Brisbane we will continue to see significant road network cuts," he said.

He urged people to be careful on the roads and listen to their radios for information.

Mr Roberts warned that e-coli had been found in the water system in Chinchilla.

Residents of Chinchilla are being advised to boil their water.

Mr Roberts said the Brisbane River was currently at 4.16 metres and rising.

It's expected to reach a peak of 5.5 metres around 4am (AEST) on Thursday.

"One of the significant issues with this flood peak is that it's expected to remain high for 12 to 18 hours," Mr Roberts said.

The Bremer River at Ipswich is currently at 19.4 metres but it is still expected to rise to around 20.5 metres on Wednesday, he said.

Both expected peaks are higher than what occurred in 1974.

Police Commissioner Bob Atkinson said the southwestern border town of Goondiwindi was expected to see a flood peak of 10.7 metres - around 30 centimetres below its levee bank.

"So it will be touch and go for Goondiwindi," he said.


