AAP

Australia's brightest business minds will form a taskforce to help Queensland recover from its devastating floods, Prime Minister Julia Gillard has announced.

The group will seek corporate donations and use its expertise to help with rebuilding and recovery efforts, Ms Gillard said on Tuesday.

Federal Treasurer Wayne Swan will chair the group, with his assistant treasurer Bill Shorten, trucking magnate Lindsay Fox and Queensland treasurer Andrew Fraser also among its 10 members.

"The purpose of bringing leading corporate identities together ... is to further leverage corporate support for the recovery and rebuilding in Queensland," Ms Gillard told reporters in Melbourne.

"Already, corporate Australia has been tremendously generous.

"But given the scale of this disaster, we need to do more."

Rural business giant Wesfarmers quickly answered the prime minister's call and has pledged $5 million towards the Queensland appeal.

"It's that kind of additional generosity on top of current efforts that we are looking for through this business task force and through its business connections to corporate Australia," Ms Gillard said.

The prime minister said she wrote to corporate Australia on Monday asking if they would consider making further donations to the flood appeal.

Standing beside the prime minister as she made the announcement, Mr Fox said it was a pleasure to back up all of the requirements of the head of Queensland's flood recovery task force Major General Mick Slater.

"Some of the areas where he needs supply of some goods, we've probably got the access. And I guess it's my job to help create a lot of that access that comes through in ultimate outcome for the people of Queensland," he said.

Other members of the group will include Woolworths CEO Michael Luscombe, Leighton Holdings Ltd CEO David Stewart and Australian Industry Group CEO Heather Ridout.

The taskforce will initially be formed for three months.

The prime minister also announced that the federal government would contribute $1 million to kick start community fundraising for the Victorian flood appeal.

Victorian Premier Ted Baillieu had requested further natural disaster assistance, specifically money for households to replace items ruined by flood waters, clean-up money and support for small businesses and primary producers.

She said she would respond as soon as possible so that further funding could be made available to Victorians.

Ms Gillard said Queensland communities were going through a very similar experience to Victorians after the Black Saturday bushfires of 2009 which killed 173 people.

"You are sitting in your home and life was normal one moment and then devastation hits you the next ... that sort of feeling of shock and trauma is very much the same, so I think there are things that happen to you that we can learn from, experiences that we can share," she said.

The prime minister said that, personally, the floods had left her feeling sad, but also determined.

"For me, there is a lot of sorrow, but also a lot of pride in seeing how Australians responded and a lot of determination about how we are going to get through this," she said.


