AAP

Two NSW towns near the Queensland border are set to be hit with heavy flooding on Thursday.

Boggabilla, with 650 residents and the mostly indigenous town of Toomelah, with 200 people, are expected to be inundated by the Macintyre River.

The flood peak, expected to be reached on Thursday, has been revised upwards from 12.4 metres to 12.5 metres.

State Emergency Service (SES) spokesman Phil Campbell said residents had been asked to evacuate on Wednesday.

About 450 people had already left their homes and the SES was persuading the remaining residents to evacuate on Thursday morning.

"Those two towns are the main concern today," Mr Campbell told AAP.

"(The peak) does put up to a metre of fast-flowing water through parts of the town, which makes it a rather dangerous situation."

Mr Campbell said residents had been asked to stay with family or friends or at the accommodation arranged by the department of community services in Moree, 120km to he south.

Across the state nearly 2,000 people have been asked to evacuate while 7,700 residents are isolated by floodwater and stranded on their properties or holiday accommodation.

However, flooding near Grafton on the north coast has improved.

The Pacific Highway south of Grafton has reopened to all traffic but is still closed to the north of the city.

The highway was closed in both directions on Tuesday when it was blocked by floodwaters from the Clarence River.

Access to the nearby towns of Ulmarra, Brushgrove and Cowper, which have been evacuated, could be restored in the next couple of days, the SES says.

Further north, access to the townships of Bonalbo and Urbenville has been restored and residents are now returning to their homes.

"The situation is improving, particularly in the north coast of NSW," Mr Campbell said.

Sixty-three local government areas in NSW have been declared natural disaster areas since December as a result of flooding.

Police have reassured residents of Boggabilla and Toomelah that their property and belongings will be protected while they are away from their homes.

"Anything that can be salvaged will be protected," Local Area Commander Bob Barnett said.

"We are urging residents to rest assured, stay safe and not return prematurely for fear of your property," Detective Superintendent Barnett said in a statement.

He also asked motorists not to return while the area was flooded.

"We are pleading with the public not to make the job harder for the emergency services in the area by putting yourself into harm's way," he said.


